{:title "Disposing of computers becoming a global concern"
:layout :post
:tags  ["science"]}

Copyright (C) 1999 Nando Media  
Copyright (C) 1999 Scripps Howard News Service  

August 8, 1999 12:16 a.m. EDT http://www.nandotimes.com) - The world is
rapidly becoming awash in computer junk, and no one knows what to do with it.
The problem, experts say, is only expected to get worse.

Computers become obsolete in 18 months or less. U.S. manufacturers are selling
36.7 million new computers a year, about 80 percent of them for domestic
consumption.

As a result, old computers, printers and related equipment are as ubiquitous
at yard sales as chipped teapots and Beanie Babies, only less valuable.

The problem may increase significantly next year if, as some industry and
environmental experts predict, millions of computer owners decide it's cheaper
to buy a new personal computer rather than try to make their old one Y2K
compliant.

A new study by the National Safety Council estimates 20.6 million PCs became
obsolete in 1998 in the United States alone, but only 11 percent - about 2.3
million units - were recycled. Another 1.3 million old pieces of computer
equipment were refurbished, mostly by charities.

"I think people are just learning how extreme this problem may become if we
don't learn how to manage it," said Dawn Amore, author of the report.

So where are all these old PCs, laptops, printers and other computer-related
equipment going? No one knows for sure, but the indications are that most are
gathering dust in closets, attics and garages because their owners don't know
what to do with them.

A survey by the Massachusetts Department of Environmental Protection of
computer owners in that state found 40 percent had a PC stop working in the
past year and 33 percent of them had simply put the machine in storage. Only 1
percent put the computer out with the trash.

"This is not a soda bottle you just emptied," said Patty Dillon, a research
associate at Tufts University and an expert on electronics industry product
design and recycling. "This is a piece of computer equipment that most likely
you paid over $2,000 for a few years ago. Your belief is that this thing
sitting on your desk has to have value."

The reality, said Dillon, is that most old computers "have a net negative
value."

Not only is there no market for selling them, it's getting increasingly
difficult to give them away. Few people want a computer slower than a 486
model because it won't run up-to-date software and isn't capable of surfing
the Internet.

"Who gets rid of a 486? Typically what you see coming out of houses now are
386s, 286s or worse," Dillon said.

Leah Jung, a Denver consultant who advises corporations on how to handle high-
tech waste, said she got a rude awakening when she suggested during an
interview with a radio network that consumers donate their old computer
equipment to charities that ship it to impoverished communities overseas.

"I got slammed with e-mail from Third World countries," Jung said.
"Basically the message was, 'Don't make us a dumping ground for your old
equipment.' "

One message from Africa did request information on how to obtain equipment,
but the sender didn't want anything less powerful than a 486.

"Four months from now they'll probably only want Pentiums because the
technology changes so fast," Jung said.

Common sense says that eventually people will clean out their closets and
their computer junk will hit the waste stream. That has environmentalists
worried because computers contain lots of hazardous materials and are not
easily recyclable.

More than 700 chemicals are used to manufacture a PC, about half of them
toxic. For example, plastic computer casings are coated with toxic fire
retardant. A computer monitor contains roughly 2 1/2 pounds of lead, most of
it in the glass. If thrown into a landfill, the lead might not necessarily
leach into the soil. But many communities rely on incineration rather than
landfills. Incinerating computer remains can release dioxin and heavy metals
into the atmosphere, contributing to acid rain.

"When you add together the growth rate of the waste stream and the toxicity
problem, it's a pretty serious matter," said Ted Smith, executive director of
the Silicon Valley Toxics Coalition, which focuses on environmental problems
associated with the computer industry. "And then there's also the problem of
a lack of infrastructure to deal with it."

Most recycled computers come from large companies that contract with
manufacturers to haul away their old equipment when they purchase new
equipment.

In the Boston area, there are 13 computer recycling firms that will haul away
old computers, but it's all commercial business. A state survey found none of
the firms had ever picked up a computer from a household.

As a general rule, computers retired by big companies are more likely to be
newer and more valuable than those retired by small businesses and homeowners.

In Denver, Technology Recycling Consultants charges $100 to recycle a personal
computer (monitor, CPU and keyboard) and won't haul away any less than five
computers at a time, which restricts their pickup service primarily to larger
businesses. Ordinary consumers can bring their old computer to a drop-off
center and pay the $100, but there's a limit of three computers per household.

Still, computer recycling is a growing industry.

"I think that the more people become aware that there are options other than
a landfill, the more they will use a recycler, even if it costs them a few
dollars to do it," said Peter Muscanelli, president of the International
Association of Electronics Recyclers, founded last year.

However, taking a computer to a recycler doesn't necessarily solve the waste
problem. Increasingly, the remains of used computers in the United States that
are retrieved by manufacturers or taken to recyclers are ultimately finding
their way to China, Smith said.

"If you ship it to China, because the wage rates are so low, they can make it
economical to do a final round of disassembly and recovery," Smith said.
"Also, environmental laws are so lax, you can burn stuff there that it is not
OK to burn here."

Entrepreneurs are coming up with new innovations that can help. For example,
Conigliaro Industries Inc. of Framingham, Mass., has developed a process that
breaks down old computer housings and uses the plastic pellets as pothole
filler. GreenDisk of Redmond, Wash., wipes used, high-quality computer
diskettes clean of information and then labels and repackages the disks for
sale. The company recycled 30 million disks last year.

Millions of used plastic disks also are gathering dust in desk drawers and
closets because companies and consumers are concerned that throwing them away
is not only environmentally unsound but could result in the unauthorized
disclosure of sensitive information.

Computer hard drives present a similar problem. Killing a file doesn't always
mean it isn't retrievable. For example, there was a commotion in Lincolnshire,
England, recently when used PCs from a government agency appeared on the
second-hand market still holding details of local child abuse cases.

Another problem down the road is an estimated 250 million television sets that
will become obsolete at the end of 2005 when broadcasters switch from analog
to digital transmissions for new, high-definition TV sets (HDTV). Like
computer monitors, TV sets are not easily recyclable and have cathode ray
tubes with significant amounts of lead.

Eyeing both the computer and television problems, Massachusetts recently
became the first state to impose a ban on the disposal of cathode ray tubes.
South Carolina is considering a $5 tax on the tubes, with the proceeds going
to a l trust fund to deal with the problem.

David Isaacs, director of environmental affairs for the Electronic Industries
Alliance, which includes most computer and computer-related equipment makers,
acknowledged that computer trash is growing but insisted that "it is still
relatively small in the scheme of things. It's not like there is any kind of
emergency."

The industry has been responding to the problem primarily by trying to design
new computers so that they are more easily taken apart for recycling, Isaacs
said. Most major manufacturers have made adjustments in their products.

IBM announced in March that it will start shipping a new line of personal
computers in which the plastic in the central processing unit is 100 percent
recycled.

The industry is also studying ways to reduce use of toxic materials, but in
some instances there may be "no technically viable substitutes," Isaacs
said. For example, the flame retardant used on computer casing is required by
law. The lead in computer monitors is to protect users from dangerous
radiation.

The European Union has issued a draft directive that would make computer and
other major electronic equipment manufacturers responsible for recycling used
products. It would ban the use of some materials, including lead.

"The underlying premise," Smith said, "is that if a company such as IBM,
Dell, Compaq or Apple is forced to assume this responsibility, it's going to
cause them to rethink the way they design their products."

The only alternative, Smith said, is for taxpayers to pick up the cost of
disposal.

However, the Clinton administration and U.S. manufacturers are fighting the
directive, arguing that it is an illegal trade barrier.

If the directive is adopted, U.S. manufacturers would most likely be forced to
adopt the European standards by default because most computer products are
made for a global market.

"This is the most dynamic, cutting-edge industry in the world, and we don't
think that in the absence of a real compelling case as to why government
regulations should be telling us how to design our products that it makes
sense in sort of a cavalier fashion to be banning essential materials,"
Isaacs said. "We think (the directive) could restrict the trade in electronic
products around the world and could potentially have a more adverse impact on
American manufacturers."

