{:title "THIS FANCY OF MINE for 5/2/2002: Only 12% of the CIMC newswire is original content"
:layout :post
:tags  ["indymedia"]}

> "Now, knowing as I do that it behooves us to obey the decisions of the
authorities and to believe them, since they are guided by a higher insight
than any to which my humble mind can of itself attain, I consider this
treatise which I send you to be merely a poetical conceit, or a dream...this
fancy of mine...this chimera."

> \-- Galileo Galilei, in a 1618 letter to Austrian archduke Leopold who asked
him for a sample of his work.

Sir Thomas Gresham, the financial agent for Queen Elizabeth I, is best
remembered today for his namesake dictum--Gresham's law--that "bad money
drives out good". Or more generally, bad anything drives out good anything.
In whatever forum you choose, its easier and/or cheaper to make and/or get
something of lower quality than higher quality, and the resulting abundance of
lower quality reduces the amount of higher quality.

Some Usenet groups I used to frequent exhibit this same quality. Spammers
would flood the groups with posts that were commercial or pornographic,
irrelevant or embarrassing. In so doing, most people were hard-pressed to find
thoughtful, insightful, funny, quality posts, or anything of quality for that
matter. Fewer people frequented the group, fewer posts were made (never mind
fewer quality posts), and some groups shriveled up altogether due to lack of
interest.

And, sad to say, the Chicago Independent Media Center newswire--whose main
virtue is a free open-publishing service--is an understandable victim to the
vice of lower quality.

To see how much firsthand, I conducted a small study of the Chicago IMC
newswire. I surveyed 34 articles on the newswire from a point of time that
passed--April 28 through April 30, article IDs 10195 through 10291. These are
the articles that are currently in the newswire archives and which remain in
public view.

In looking at the survey, I grouped newswire posts into one of four
categories: (1) reposts of articles from other sources (e.g., AP, Reuters, the
Guardian, etc.), (2) announcements of upcoming events, (3) original content,
and (4) the barrelscraping "everything else" or "other".

Of the 34 articles I examined, 18 articles were article reposts (about 52% of
the total), 7 were event announcements (about 20%), 5 were "other" posts
(14%), and just 4 were original content (12%). (The percentages don't total
100% because of rounding. And by the way, of those 34 articles I looked at,
some 22 comments were posted, clustering around only 9 posts.)

This dovetails with my personal experience of using the newswire. I wonder if
similar numbers could be replicated on a larger-scale survey of the CIMC
newswire or on a wide-scale survey of multiple IMC newswires.

So the course of action to take would be clear: those who can post original
content to the newswire should do so. I'm not saying that a cool reposts or
announcements shouldn't continue to be made to the newswire; they certainly
should. But every post includes an exhortation for putting *new* quality
content. So, put up new quality content.

In other words, don't hate the Indymedia newswire. Become the Indymedia
newswire.

To that end, I'm starting a (probably biweekly [but more like "occasional"])
web column called "This Fancy of Mine." And you just read the first
installment of it--my small part to increase the 12% of original content on
the newswire and encourage others to contribute likewise.

If Rick Reilly can simultaneously amuse and annoy me with his 500-word-a-week
screed in Sports Illustrated, why can't I crank out at least as many quality
words on topics that are actually important? Zoe Mitchell can make occasional
good contributions to the DC Indymedia; why can't I do the same for Chicago
Indymedia?

Maybe the bad can drive out the good, but maybe the threat of a good example
can encourage a backlash.

As Bertold Brecht wrote: "Do not ask what the future will be like but.
Determine it."

