{:title "Chicago Tonight, Chicago Too White?: An interview about a study of Chicago public television"
:layout :post
:tags  ["media"]}

With mentions in the Sun-Time, the Chicago Reader, the Chicago Daily Herald,
WBEZ, WZRD, WLUW, Free Press, Media Channel, and Current Magazine (the trade
publication of public broadcasting), Chicago Media Action's study of WTTW's
flagship news program Chicago Tonight" has generated a lot of buzz. The study,
released last month, finds that Chicago public television, rather than living
up to its mission of serving the underserved and unserved, is instead bowing
down to "Elites, Affluence and Advertising". CMA member and Third Coast Press
staff writer Mitchell Szczepanczyk sat down to answer some frequently asked
questions about the study, and to set us straight on some frequently
questioned answers about it.  
  
**Q: What made Chicago Media Action decide to do a study of public television?**   
  
A: CMA, since its founding, has taken on as one of its projects, improving
public broadcasting in America and in Chicago. We've tried a number of
approaches: submitting a number of documentaries for the station to consider
airing (they haven't said yes once), and requesting a documentary-and-forum
series on issues of community importance (that was turned down, too). CMA has
also tasked itself to carry out formal, scholarly studies of the media as a
tool for improving the media. In the face of these repeated turndowns, WTTW
was our first major target for these studies. We particularly focused on
Chicago Tonight, the main daily flagship show of Channel 11.  
  
**Q: Tell us more about the study itself. How was it set up? What kind of things were you looking for? What did you find out?**   
  
A: We focused on guests who appeared on the show -- those who said something
on-air. We looked at thirty episodes all told: 20 episodes in September 2003,
and ten episodes in January and February 2004. We looked at a number of
criteria: demographic data (sex, race, occupation), topic segment (politics,
economics, science, entertainment, sports), and whether the segment was live
or pre-recorded. We recorded all the episodes, had people go through these
episodes, put the data into a database, and extracted aggregate information of
the data.  
  
Among the findings: More than half of the topics discussed were about
entertainment or sports, and thus had nothing to do with news. Of the
demographic data, 79% of all guests were white, 73% were male, 79% were elite
(corporate representatives, high-ranking government officials, or corporate
media). It gets worse: on business and economic segments, all the guests were
white. In segments on politics and elections, some 90% of guests on these
segments were white -- ironic since Illinois will likely send a man of African
descent to the Senate. Of segments representing large public constituencies
like public interest representatives or organized labor, [non-whites] were
guests just a shade above 3 percent combined. The case of organized labor is
especially shameful: 0.5 percent, just two guests out of 419 guests, and one
of those was on a segment titled "The Best Bosses in America."  
  
**Q: In the study, you don't just look at what's happening on TV, you also take a look at what's happening behind the scenes, how the station is funded, how it's run, and how this influences what gets on the air. Could you elaborate?**   
  
A: This ties in with the documentary-and-forum series. When we asked for the
series, we were pushing especially hard (this was early March 2003) for a
discussion of the then-impending war in Iraq. It turns out that shortly after
the station turned us down, it was announced that one of the new members of
WTTW's Board of Directors was Kenneth Hannah, the VP for Finance of Boeing, a
newly transplanted Chicago company and a major military contractor which stood
to cash in big directly from the war. While the station and Chicago Tonight
could have mentioned the growing peace movement in Chicago, it could not have
given consistent coverage without irking major financial interests, along with
many other financial and corporate ties that also play a part in the station's
board. You simply can't irk them for very long if you hope to ask them for
funds to maintain a $25-million-a-year operation.  
  
**Q: The subtitle of the study is "Elites, Affluence, and Advertising." I think one of the most damning things in the study is Appendix Twelve, which shows internal documents from an underwriters' (or advertisers') package given out by the station.**   
  
A: We just asked WTTW, Could we have your advertising package? And lo and
behold, they sent us a copy, thinking we were a prospective advertiser. The
package presents a different perspective on the station, and I would describe
it as a more accurate perspective. But this is addressed to an audience which
needs to know the truth so that they have information about making sound
investment choices, even though it is disgusting to see WTTW describe its
audience as "Affluent, Cultured, and Educated" (their words).  
  
**Q: WTTW hasn't made a lot of replies to the CMA study, but in a report on WBEZ and in a piece in the Chicago Reader, WTTW said that some of the things CMA wants are or could be covered by public access channels like CAN TV. Is that true?**   
  
A: It's not true, and the reason is enmeshed in law, particularly the Public
Broadcasting Act of 1967 which founded what became PBS and NPR. The Act
mandates that public broadcasting serve as an alternative to the dominant
commercial broadcasters in the United States, to provide "a forum for debate,"
to "serve unserved and underserved audiences." It's a fantastic cause, one I
support wholeheartedly, but the problem is: what's the economic and
institutional support to make sure that's more than just words? And there's
been precious little in the way of that kind of support. I can understand why
WTTW is currying favor from major corporate interests for whatever the
percentage of its budget is for underwriting. The station is trying to
marginalize efforts of public concern to public access, and that's not to
belittle public access in the least. CMA has fought very strongly in support
of CAN TV, especially in its funding fight in calendar year 2004. But remember
that WTTW has a much wider reach than CAN TV.  
  
**Q: What kind of impact has the study had so far? Has it made any waves outside of Chicago?**   
  
A: It's gotten a fair amount of local media coverage (the Sun-Times, the
Reader, NPR). We hope to continue this in coming weeks and months. There's
been some buzz among media activist organizers nationwide: Free Press in
Massachusetts and Mediachannel in New York made prominent mentions of the
study. Current magazine, the trade magazine of public broadcasting, also
mentioned the study on their website. So we're getting coverage.  
  
Has the study had an impact on WTTW or in other communities? Haven't seen that
just yet. It's still early in the ballgame.  
  
**Q: What do you think would Chicago Tonight look like if it were better representing the Chicago community?**   
  
A: I can mention my own vision, but I should say that it shouldn't be just my
vision alone. I can say what I think, but it shouldn't be a single blueprint
for the station. An ideal Chicago Tonight would be to show stories that simply
weren't being covered in the major corporate media. In fact, my reading of the
data in the study is that Chicago Tonight tends to be a very close mimicking
of how the corporate media reacts to various stories. I would like to see
Chicago Tonight break stories.  
  
There are plenty of resources and examples for grassroots, independent
reporting that can be looked to for use as a base model for improving the
station. One example that comes to my mind is the Chicago Independent Media
Center ([chicago.indymedia.org](http://chicago.indymedia.org), NOTE -
Mitchell is involved with the center -ED). They're directly involved in all
kinds of participatory direct grassroots campaigns. The strength of their
model is that they invite people to post stories of interest on their website.
And this is a resource which has very little to do with highbrow connections
or money; Chicago Tonight would dwarf Chicago Indymedia in terms of
connections or money. All they'd have to do is change orientation so the
station is asking people: What's important? What do you think should be
covered?, and soliciting input rather than feeding people content from above.  
  
**Q: But don't you think that the argument would be, "You know, people are interested in sports. People are interested in entertainment. This is what people want, and advertisers are just paying for what people want."**   
  
A: I wouldn't call for excluding such topics. But when we're dealing with the
economics of media, it's not the same as the economics of other industries.
People would not know or cultivate an interest in certain topics if they were
never exposed to them. The classic example that comes to my mind is that of
political documentary filmmaking. Take Michael Moore, for example. Before
Fahrenheit 9/11, or even before the Oscar-winning Bowling For Columbine, you
could argue justifiably that people aren't interested in political
documentaries because no one makes any money from them, it's always a niche
market, they're boring, they're too much like what you see in school.  
  
But when people are exposed to good political documentaries, then came the
realization that it's entirely possible to make a moneymaking documentary. And
so more people have been making documentaries. And now, people have a taste
and an interest in political documentary filmmaking where they hadn't before.
But it wasn't a matter of giving people what they want, it was a matter of
giving people exposure to different options and letting people cultivate new
tastes they didn't have before. I think a strong media, and a healthy vibrant
media system would let people cultivate these new tastes and interests.  
  
_The study is available in PDF format online at [chicagomediaacction.org](http://www.chicagomediaaction.org) or call 866-260-7198 to request a print copy of the study._

