{:title "Illinois Senate Approves Rewrite of State's Telecom Act"
:layout :post
:tags  ["indymedia"]}

On Friday, April 15, the Illinois State Senate approved a proposed rewrite of
the Illinois Telecommunications Act, the main law in the state of Illinois
which governs state policy involving telephone, telecommunications, and the
internet.  
  
The bill had caused serious concern among community organizers since it would
appear to allow considerable subsidies for dominant telecommunications
companies, and would reduce public service obligations and protections against
price gouging.  
  
Organizers also feared that such legislation might indirectly act to abolish
municipal rights towards establishing community internet, as is already done
in more than a dozen states.  
  
One coalition of citizen organizers and public interest lobbyists in Illinois
has coalesced under the umbrella designation Get Illinois Online
([www.getillinoisonline.org](http://www.getillinoisonline.org)) to work
on the legislation.  
  
The bill in question, SB 1700, passed by a 37-14 vote, with 7 abstentions.
April 15 had been the final day for first-house passage of bills in the
current Illinois General Assembly.  
  
Despite the passage, the legislative struggle continues. The Illinois State
House will now take up the issue of the Telecom Rewrite, where a proposal is
waiting to grant a one-year extension on the issue. In the meantime, the
Illinois State Senate will focus on Digital Literacy legislation.  
  
Community organizing on telecommunications issues in Illinois also continues.
Community meetings would be held to discuss the legislation and its impacts,
according to an email was posted to the Get Illinois Online mailing list by
Layton Olson of the Illinois Community Technology Consortium.  
  
Planned venues include May 5, 2005 in Champaign, May 6 in East St. Louis, and
Springfield on May 19.  
  
The Illinois General Assembly may adjourn by Memorial Day.

