{:title "Review: The Silence of Malachi Ritscher"
:layout :post
:tags  ["media"]}

_The Silence of Malachi Ritscher_  
a play by the theater group Theater 5.2.1  
written by Kevin Kilroy, directed by Lewis Lain  

On November 3, 2006, Malachi Ritscher, a musician and political activist,
doused himself with gasoline and burned himself to death in protest against
the War in Iraq.

The protest evoked similar immolation protests undertaken during the Vietnam
War, which at the time garnered immediate and widespread media coverage. But
Ritscher's protest garnered very little attention or media coverage at first,
for a variety of ostensible reasons: avoiding similar copycat actions, or the
hostility of major American media to any kind of dissident protest.

In the weeks and months after Malachi Ritscher's suicide, coverage in the news
media in Chicago and worldwide increased markedly, galvanized to a significant
degree by an activist campaign called [I Heard You, Malalchi](http://www.iheardyoumalachi.org).

Coverage in various media continues still; in the works are a documentary film
about Ritscher and a jazz album dedicated to Ritscher by a group of American
musicians. But perhaps the first "creative" work about Malachi Ritscher and
his final protest debuted at the Theater Building Chicago on March 23, 2007--a
play by the theater group Theater 5.2.1, written by Kevin Kilroy and directed
by Lewis Lain, named _The Silence of Malachi Ritscher_.

Even though Malachi Ritscher was 52 years old when he committed suicide, the
play depicts Ritscher when he was a young man, presumably in Chicago , and
presumably in his twenties or so, as part of a young couple before having a
child. This doesn't mesh with the chronology of Ritscher's life, since he
didn't move to Chicago until the early 1980s, by which point he already
married and had a son. Nevertheless, as the play makes clear: "_The Silence of Malachi Ritscher_ is a work of fiction based off the life and actions of
Malachi Ritscher."

We see vignettes of Ritscher (played by Michael Salinas), referred to by his
given first name "Mark", devoted to his interests in music and radical
politics. His wife, Kathy, played by Cynthia Blakewell, becomes pregnant in
the course of the play, and chastises her husband for spending too much time
on his interests and not holding a steady job, nor being more of a family man.

Despite the serious issues raised by Ritscher's death, the locale of most of
the play's scenes seems to be ordinary: in a household, with the neighbors,
and at a nearby bar. There doesn't seem to be any clear buildup to the climax
to come, though throughout the play allusions occur on occasion in reference
to the end of Ritscher's life. There are several bar scenes where Rtischer's
death and the nature of political involvement are topics of discussion. There
is also a scene where the young Ritscher encounters the Ritscher of the future
--the one who burns himself to death.

I found myself unenthused to a degree by this juxtaposition of the ordinary
with little buildup to the extraordinary. But I could see how this
juxtaposition reflects life, generally, and Ritscher's life in particular. You
live your life, and then all of a sudden you hear that something unbelievable
happens out of the blue. In this case, someone--maybe someone you know--
commits a dramatic suicide for potent political reasons. Life isn't always so
neatly packaged into the traditional dramatic sequence of buildup, climax, and
denouement, and this play tried to reflect that truth.

What did grab my attention most about this play was not anything in the play
itself, but rather what the performers and playwright plan to do after the
play's run ends on Saturday, April 21, 2007. On that evening, they plan to
burn the script at a script burning party at Joey's Brickhouse (1258 W.
Belmont) across the street from the Theater Building , with a vow NEVER to
perform again _The Silence of Malachi Ritscher_.

I'm not sure that I agree with this tactic. On one hand, it is something that
certainly grabs attention, which one can argue is the whole point. But then
again, there is too much destruction and too many things that are ephemeral in
this world, which is why the script should be kept, preserved and promoted.
After all, if one point of making this play is to spread the word of what
Malachi Ritscher did, then destroying the script and condemning the play's
performance to a certain end would be counterproductive.

Then again, the life and death of this play may to some extent mimic that of
Malachi Ritscher--except that the coming death of this play has been announced
and advertised in a way that Ritscher's never was.

Obviously, and unfortunately, there's no hope of a revival for this play, but
then again neither is there hope of a revival for Malachi Ritscher himself.
With these passings, perhaps others can learn something, do something, and
contribute. So, _carpe diem_. See this play while you still can, and get
involved in other ways. You'll never get this chance again.
