{:title "CAN TV funding future faces key ordinance vote"
:layout :post
:tags  ["indymedia"]}

(CIMC) - On Friday, October 31, the City of Chicago Committee on Finance will
vote on an ordinance which would provide a more stable funding stream for
Chicago's fleet of public access cable TV channels.  
  
Chicago Access Network Television (CAN TV) is the focus of a proposed city
ordinance, which would assure stable funding from local and state cable
revenues.  
  
CAN TV was established by the City of Chicago in its original cable ordinance
with the anticipation that adequate funding would be provided from cable
franchisees. The ordinance to fund CAN TV would amend Chapter 4-280 of the
Municipal Code of Chicago in light of a number of changes, key among them: the
passage of Illinois state video franchise law, and the failure of meaningful
cable competition, which determines CAN TV's funding formula. As cable
competition has dwindled due to increasing concentration in cable markets, so
has CAN TV's funding base, which the City is stepping up to rectify through
this ordinance.  
  
The ordinance also assures that, with the advent of new state law, a 1%
funding stream for public, educational, and government access channels in
Illinois is directed to CAN TV from new cable providers, like AT&T. This is
consistent with the funding provided to CAN TV during the first 15 years of
Chicago's cable franchises, and will help create a stable funding source for
CAN TV.  
  
But should the ordinance fail, CAN TV would stand to lose a quarter of its
current funding base, and would almost certainly be forced to cut staff and
services. Given the healthy growth in cable revenues at a rate of 5-7%
annually, and the importance of expanding local communications as technologies
evolve in the digital age, it is critically important to preserve local media
resources like CAN TV. The time is now for the City of Chicago to stand firm
and assure the health of the organization it created to serve Chicago
residents and groups.  
  
Presently, formal support for the ordinance appears to be strong. 37 of
Chicago's 50 aldermen have signed the ordinance, which was introduced by
longtime Chicago Aldermen Edmund Burke (14th Ward) and Bernard Stone (50th
Ward). But this is Chicago, and it's not over until the ordinance passes, a
process that comes to its first test at the upcoming City of Chicago Committee
on Finance hearing on Friday October 31, at 10am at City Hall, Room 201-A.
Every Chicago resident with an interest in sustaining CAN TV's service to the
community is encouraged to show support by attending this hearing and urging
support of this ordinance from the Mayor and City Council.  
  
CAN TV is home to a number of activist-oriented regular TV shows, including
Chicago Independent Television (the monthly TV show of Chicago Indymedia),
Labor Beat, Democracy Now!, CAN TV Community Partners, and regular call-in
shows for a host of political activist groups including the Iraq Veterans
Against the War and the Gay Liberation Network. A failed vote on October 31
ordinance would almost certainly affect the future viability of some, perhaps
all, of these shows.

