{:title "Chicagoans Compete in 2nd Annual Transatlantic Quiz on March 15"
:layout :post
:tags  ["trivia"]}

Contact: Mitchell Szczepanczyk  
Email: mitchell@szcz.org  
  
CHICAGO -- For the second consecutive year, Chicago's best trivia experts will
participate in an international quiz competition along with other Americans
against trivia experts in Canada and the United Kingdom. The event, the Second
Annual Transatlantic Quiz, will feature participants in all three countries
taking the same 240-question written test.  
  
Chicagoans will take part in this quiz on Saturday March 15, beginning at 12
Noon, at the Albany Park Branch Library (5150 N. Kimball Ave. Chicago). At the
same time, the same exact quiz will be given in Surrey, England, as well as in
Ottawa, Canada, and in the following U.S. cities: Athens (Georgia), Austin
(Texas), Boulder (Colorado), Lakeland (Florida), New York City, Phoenix, Sioux
Falls (South Dakota), St. Louis, and Seattle.  
  
The test will cover a wide array of topics -- culture, entertainment, history,
lifestyle, media, sports, science, and the world. The questions for the quiz
have been balanced between the three competing countries and developed from
the USA by Ray Hamel, reference librarian and crossword puzzle constructor, NY
Times Trivia Master, and Quiz writer for "Pages" magazine and Paul Bailey,
president of the Game Show Congress. Questions from Canada have been developed
by Paul Paquet, trivia writer through Triviahalloffame.com for clients such as
Microsoft Encarta and MTV Europe, head writer for World Trivia Night, and a
writer for merchandising of "1v100" and "Who Wants To Be A Millionaire". The
questions from the UK have been developed by Chris Jones, former civil servant
and winner on "Who Wants To Be A Millionaire" who now works full-time for
Quizzing.co.uk.  
  
The 2007 Transatlantic Quiz saw participants in nine cities across the United
States, including Chicago, which came in second only to New York City in the
number of participants from a single American city. Chicagoan Joshua Kreitzer
finished second among all American participants in the 2007 Transatlantic
Quiz.  
  
The Transatlantic Quiz is free and open to anyone to participate. Advance
registration is preferred but not necessary. The Transatlantic Quiz is a
precursor for the World Quizzing Championships, which take place June 7, 2008.  
  
For more information, visit www.transatlanticquiz.com and
iqausa.googlepages.com

