{:title "Print adaptation of \"The Montesi Maneuver: A Way To Think About Corporations, Markets, Participatory Economics, and the Environment\""
:layout :post
:tags  ["economics"]}

Regarding the future of humanity and of our shared natural environment, there
are few threats greater than present-day corporations. One can readily
brainstorm many examples of corporations and their horrible environmental
actions, like Exxon-Mobil and the role it plays in exacerbating global
warming. General Electric and their advocacy of the nuclear industry
(including nuclear weapons), and Monsanto and the role it plays in the
emergence and horrid consequences of genetically modified organisms.  
  
Proposals for action to oppose this state of near-total corporate dominance
tend to be tame compared to the might wielded by these corporate empires. But
before successful opposition can happen, successful acts of imagination must
happen first, which the political left has been lacking for the most part. In
this article, I spell out some new developments in the realm of what might be
called "political imagination" and how that can mount a new initiative to
hopefully oppose--indeed wipe out--corporate power.  
  
I propose to wipe out corporate power by wiping out the markets in which
corporations thrive, using an economic model called "participatory economics
Participatory economics, often abbreviated parecon, is a proposed economic
system that uses participatory decision making as an economic mechanism to
guide the production, consumption and allocation of resources in a given
society. " as both the ideological lynchpin to oppose markets and
corporations and as a more environmentally sound economy to replace markets
and corporations.  
  
**A word about corporate power**  
  
To oppose corporate power, we must better elucidate the corporate form and its
wider operational context. A corporation is a legally defined economic entity
with the goal of ever-increasing levels of short-term profit for its
shareholders at the expense of everything else--including our shared natural
environment. To be sure, not all entities called "corporations" follow or
followed this definition, but our focus is those corporations which are
serious environmental threats, and which do follow this mandate.  
  
Activists and whole campaigns and movements have been increasingly focusing
their energy and efforts against corporations. Yet why, despite this devotion
of energy, have these efforts faced limits to their success and a constant
threat of rollback? There are a number of reasons, to be sure, but let me
posit one crucial and little-considered reason: that the wider economic
context in which corporations survive and thrive itself remains in place. That
context is the market.  
  
**The market connection to corporate power**   
  
A market is an institution of buyers and sellers where buyers and sellers are
pitted against one another in a zero-sum game -- that is, someone gains at the
expense of someone else's loss, and vice-versa. I emphasize the competitive
nature of markets in this definition for one main reason: it explains why
corporations are at an advantage in a market economy.  
  
It is clearly possible (and common) to succeed in markets by gaining at
someone else's expense. And obviously winning is better than losing, in a
market or in most any other context. Therefore, it makes sense to always
behave so that you would gain at someone else's expense. In other words, it's
rational to become a monster, or exhibit behavior like that of a monster, in a
market. And if you're not a monster and facing down a monster, one expected
response in this context is become a monster in response. Then it becomes a
matter of monsters fighting other monsters. And the competitive arms race then
begins: The bigger the monster, the better the chance to win.  
  
As Joel Bakan ably demonstrates in his classic book, "The Corporation," a
corporation can be thought of as the equivalent of a monster in a market
economy, and in the competitive context of markets it makes sense to become a
monster to win those competitions. And the bigger the monster, the better the
chance to win more of those competitions. This also explains, I think, why
markets tend to consolidate--amid wide-spread competition over time,
participants are steadily eliminated through buyout or attrition or both. In a
fashion reminiscent of a poker tournament, fewer and fewer "players" command
more and more "chips" in the "game "--the very definition of
concentration.  
  
Markets are frequently lauded as democratic institutions, yet markets over
time inevitably become a source of strength for corporations--institutions
which are inherently undemocratic. Thus, economic models which incorporate
markets are actually and inherently undemocratic and will ultimately fail in
their efforts to promote democratic norms. While it's true that provisions can
be made to mitigate the negative effects of markets, just as we see in
present-day efforts to oppose corporations, corporations thrive in a market
setting so corporations have a big reason to fight those provisions, and they
also have the muscle thanks to the zero-sum predilection of markets to win a
lot of their fights.  
  
Depressing though all of this may sound, it actually is cause for rejoicing
since it offers a way forward. If you oppose corporations, oppose markets. If
you want to abolish corporations, abolish markets. But you're still left with
two key questions: One, if you get rid of markets, what economic model do you
put in their place instead to address economic needs? Two, will that
replacement help protect the environment?  
  
**A modest proposal: Abolish corporate power with parecon** In 1991, Michael Albert and Robin Hahnel introduced for the first time an economic model known as participatory economics, "parecon" for short. Like any economy, parecon is concerned with production, consumption and allocation, but it also seeks to do more than that--it also seeks to promote a number of values, including solidarity, efficiency, equity, diversity, self-management, and environmental protection.   
  
There are four main institutions parecon uses to promote these values:  
  
1. All jobs are balanced for desirability and empowerment  
  
2. Remuneration is determined by effort and sacrifice in socially valued
labor as gauged by one's workmates.  
  
3. Economic decisions are made by decision-making bodies comprising those who
work in a workplace or consume in a residence, where those who are impacted by
a decision have decision-making power proportional to the degree they're
impacted by that decision.  
  
4. A participatory planning procedure addresses allocation, where consumption
or production plans are submitted, with the help of a facilitation mechanism,
to those who are impacted by those plans, and revised if necessary by those
who made those plans in a series of rounds based on assorted qualitative and
quantitative feedback.  
  
Parecon can also be the economic mechanism to abolish corporations because
corporations cannot survive in a participatory economy. A participatory
economy is anathema to everything comprising a corporation. Corporations bear
job hierarchies, whereas participatory economics requires jobs balanced for
desirability and empowerment. Corporations pay unfair wages and make decisions
that (often negatively) affect those outside of the corporation with little
say in those decisions; parecon, by definition, pays more fairly and provides
more fair decision-making power to its participants Corporations are monsters
necessary for battle in the competitive realm of markets. Parecon does not use
markets, but rather participatory planning for the shared goal of eliminating
excess demand.  
  
But even if parecon does provide the context for putting environment-
destroying corporations on the defensive, does a participatory economy help
protect the environment rather than become another devil we oppose? There's
reason to think so. The quantitative data in the participatory planning
procedure include indicative costs on the environment. Actions that have
greater environmental impacts bear greater costs in the economy, rather than
those in other economic models which tend to ignore such costs. Those who bear
such environmental costs also possess decision-making power in proportion to
their degree of impact, so they have the means in addition to the motivation
to act.  
  
**The Montesi Maneuver**   
  
Assuming this proposal is sound and worthwhile, a number of objections can be
raised. One is that this proposal is not very "realistic," and not apt to
happen anytime soon, if ever, therefore it's not worth fighting for.  
  
When it comes to matters of positive social change, what's deemed
"realistic" can change, perhaps very dramatically. Very often, it's not a
matter of hope but of serious and determined effort and effective planning.
Ask anyone who helped bring down the Seattle World Trade Organization
ministerial in 1999, or who helped stop (as I know firsthand FCC-led media
concentration in 2003, or any of a number of activist efforts which were once
dismissed as "unrealistic." Imagine what will be "realistic" tomorrow.  
  
Another objection that can be raised is that there's no apparent way to get
from here to there, so it's not worth trying. Just because there's no easy or
apparent way doesn't mean that there is no way. (Indeed, it was often claimed
that there was no "third way" for economics besides markets and command
planning, until parecon came on the scene.) A proposed strategy is to use
"non-reformist reforms"--aiming activist efforts in the here and now for
tangible current reforms, but not stopping at winning those reforms for their
own sake (important though they may be). Instead, the idea is to use those
reforms as stepping stones towards a larger goal, in this case for winning a
participatory economy.  
  
Those who advocate such an approach can increase their chances for success if
they can explain their relevance to and be aligned with other current
movements for positive social change--like those already underway against
corporations on a host of issues, including the environment.  
  
These two efforts--advocacy for participatory economics and activism against
corporate power--have had little in common, but I think they stand to gain
tremendously from one another. The anti-corporate forces generally don't take
an oppositional stance against markets, so they stand vulnerable to corporate
blowback. Moreover, opposition to markets is well-nigh impossible without
answering the question: "What economic system do you advocate instead?" And
in return, parecon-aligned efforts can gain a whole new base of support and
alliances that they didn't have before.  
  
I propose a "merger" of sorts of anti-corporate efforts and those forces
aligned with participatory economics. I call this the Montesi (pronounced
"mon-TESS-ee") Maneuver, named for a family of clergy in American graphic
novels in the 1980s who established a similar "merger" against another
alignment of destructive forces.  
  
Whether or not this Montesi Maneuver or other such maneuvers or "mergers" or
even whole efforts will succeed is unclear, but what I think is clear is that
such combinations of previously unrelated ideas or activist movements will be
useful, perhaps necessary, in our quest to oppose and abolish corporate power
and save the environment.  
  
_This article is based on the author's presentation at the June 29, 2008 Surviving Climate Change roundtable in St. Louis. Mitchell Szczepanczyk is a co-founder of and organizer with the Chicago Area Participatory Economics Society._ 

