{:title "Pushing the First Domino: Remarks at Media Democracy Day (Chicago) - November 7, 2009"
:layout :post
:tags  ["media"]}

This week marks seven years since the founding of the group I'm representing
today, Chicago Media Action (CMA). A fuller recounting of CMA's history is
online at chicagomediaaction.org, but one common theme to many CMA campaigns
is I what like to refer to as "pushing the first domino". You can stand
dominos on end in lines where a push of a single domino causes one domino
after another to fall, and I think that is emblematic of a lot of CMA's work
in the sense that we have taken media policy issues that were and are
important yet not very widely known, even among activists, and worked to help
raise their awareness. The hope is that increased popular awareness can lead
to increased popular involvement at key points in media policy work,
particularly when media policy on the whole tends away from public awareness
and involvement.  
  
This domino metaphor fails in one crucial respect. It's pretty easy to push a
single actual domino. But pushing that first domino on media issues is pretty
hard, since it can take a lot of effort to get even potential allies up to
speed on media issues. Luckily, that has improved dramatically in the past
seven years, and not a moment too soon, since we all face an historic
opportunity in what media scholar Bob McChesney has termed a "critical
juncture". A "critical juncture" is a rare and brief period in a society
where it's possible to dramatically change the institutions that produce
media, far more possible than outside a critical juncture. Critical junctures
occur when any two of the following three phenomena occur at once:  
  
1\. There is a revolutionary new communications technology that undermines the
existing system.  
2\. The content of the present media system is seen as illegitimate and
discredited.  
3\. There is a major political crisis where the existing order is no longer
working and there are major movements for social reform.  
  
If we have all three of these phenomena at once, you not only have a critical
juncture but one with a much higher potential for setting institutions that
provide better media. So, do we have a critical juncture with all of these
criteria?  
  
There is a revolutionary new communications technology that undermines the
existing system: the internet. The content of the media system is arguably
seen as illegitimate and discredited. And there is a major political crisis:
The financial system imploded over the past 16 months, affecting whole
industries (including media) and whatever remains is propped up through
massive government bailouts.  
  
Are there major movements for social reform? The answer seems to be "maybe",
considering the activism on, you name it: health care, the environment,
foreign policy, the economy, and even media. Are they "major"? It depends on
your definition; I think the definition should be: do we even have to debate
the question? If we have to, the answer is "no, they're not major". If not,
we have to work until a debate of the question is unnecessary, but there is
reason for hope. So I would like to now list six media policy fronts that I
expect to be spheres of work in the coming years, perhaps for CMA and
hopefully for everyone here, to improve the odds for building those major
movements.  
  
1\. Establish net neutrality. Congress and the FCC are poised to implement
into law policies to preserve the principle of non-interference of content by
internet service providers, or "net neutrality". Comcast, AT&T;, and Verizon
will certainly lobby hard against it, but the momentum is on the side of the
angels this time. But we have to keep at it.  
  
2\. Improve radio. It's very likely that Congress will pass the Local
Community Radio Act, which coupled with upcoming FCC windows in high-power
radio are poised to improve radio by expanding the number of locally
responsive radio channels across the country. Odds are good on this front as
well, but we have to keep the ball rolling.  
  
3\. Defend public access television. Access channels like Chicago's CAN TV are
under threat by state video franchises over the past five years, which removed
local control and local funding of cable franchises, ostensibly to reduce
prices and increase competition but which do neither. There is momentum,
including legislation introduced by Tammy Baldwin, to help turn this around,
but more work is quickly needed lest we see outlets like CAN TV disappear.
(And we've already seen a number of public access outlets already disappear.)  
  
4\. Establish non-profit journalism. Some seeds for this are being sown now,
with non-profit journalism efforts like ProPublica and Democracy Now! But we
can draw on nonprofit media efforts from overseas, and especially with a
mismanagement crisis plaguing the American newspaper industry, the time is
ripe for further efforts.  
  
5\. Expand activist efforts into other social and media spheres. The main
motivation for founding U.S. network media was to cover boxing and the World
Series, and sports remains a cash cow for major media. Also, the domestic
video game industry now draws higher annual profits than Hollywood. But there
are negligible activist efforts on sports media, the video games industry, and
other such spheres long ignored by progressives. There are some incipient
efforts, like those of the group Games For Change and sports columnist Dave
Zirin, but we have to expand work on these fronts.  
  
6\. Establish public sector broadcasting. Commercial television broadcasting
profits have dramatically fallen in the past year, to the point where major
media outlets have begun questioning the idea of even continuing broadcast TV.
The beginning of the end may happen soon: Comcast is currently in talks to
acquire NBC Universal, and with NBC in fourth place in the ratings, Comcast if
it completes the buyout could make NBC just another cable channel. And if
Comcast does that, CBS might soon follow. The end result: what's been called
"free TV" might disappear altogether in the coming decade, so anyone in
America who watches TV would have to pay for it. But this fact can be the
lynchpin of a nonprofit TV sector in America: After all, we're paying for TV,
so why shouldn't we have our money go to broad-based public service
broadcasting in the United States and have more of a say in our media, rather
than to private unaccountable fiefdoms in the cable, satellite and telecom
industries?  
  
These are the stakes. Who will organize around these realms better in days,
weeks, and months ahead? The more people get involved, the better our chances.  
  
Thank you.

