{:title "A Call for Solidarity Gaming"
:layout :post
:tags  ["economics"]}

With the 2010 Winter Olympics in Vancouver just wrapping up, I'd like to
expound upon on a ZNet commentary written by Michael Albert around the time of
the 2006 Winter Olympics in Torino. Albert's commentary, published on February
19, 2006, entitled "Olympics Parecon", said in part:  
  

> "Leftists ought to realize that the reason [that athletes who tout the line
that 'winning isn't important, it's playing well' are seen as pathetic]
happens is because we live in a savage market economy in which the credo that
winning is everything is imposed by market logic. If we deny it for sports, we
may deny it more generally, and that is too dangerous a prospect to
tolerate."

I agree that markets for many important reasons must be abolished and
replaced. The projects around a participatory society, including participatory
economics, certainly rank among the more detailed proposals for a more just
successor economy and society. But in his commentary about the Olympics,
Albert seems to imply that sports themselves essentially won't change, even if
the economics surrounding them will change to that of a participatory economy.
We'd presumably still have sports and games, presumably with a competitive
ethos, complete with winners and losers, even if we'd have jobs balanced for
desirability and empowerment, remuneration per effort and sacrifice, and
participatory planning instead of markets or command planning.  
  
These two systems - competitive contemporary sports and participatory
economics - each follow a different logic. In the realm of, say, a competitive
hockey game in the Winter Olympics, you have a team that winds up winning and
a team that winds up losing in the course of trying to achieve a result (for
example, winning the gold medal game in the Olympics hockey tournament) that
cannot be shared by both teams. On the other hand, in the realm of
participatory planning within the model of participatory economics, you have a
goal that can and must be shared by all participants: all those in
participatory planning work with the shared goal to eliminate excess economic
demand. All of the participants either all win by achieving this goal, or all
lose by not achieving it. (It brings to mind the Chomsky quote: "Even if a
single child goes to bed hungry, the entire economic system is a total
disaster.")  
  
Left activists involved with the Participatory Society projects have worked to
adapt this logic of solidarity used by parecon to other social spheres beyond
economics, enough to fill a book in fact (Real Utopia, edited by Chris
Spannos). But those of us involved in these projects should look for other
realms for this logic to fill, and one front we could pursue is to adapt this
logic to those of the sports and games that we play. Instead of having sports
and games where we have one winner and one or more losers, we should develop
and encourage sports and games where everyone wins or everyone loses,
mirroring the logic of participatory economics and a participatory society.  
  
I can imagine many people reading these words who may think that this
proposal, and sports and games generally, is just a big waste of time. Given
the urgency and scale of the collective problems we all face, who has time for
stupid games? (Not to mention the protests outside the Vancouver Olympics and
the crackdown on independent journalists trying to cross the U.S./Canada
border to cover those protests.)  
  
But sports and games often serve as an informal training ground for many
aspects of society. And sometimes they're not so informal -- police and
military in the United States have for years used retail first-person-shooter
video games as training tools.  
  
It's also worth noting that sports and games are and have been enormously
popular, and dismissing them also dismisses increased potential for outreach.
We need to expand our collective activist reach beyond the proverbial choir if
we hope to have a chance to transform society. That means reaching out to
where people and their interests lie, and for a great many people, that
includes sports and games.  
  
The benefits could be profound in other ways. For one, an emphasis on
"solidarity gaming" could serve as an extraordinary icebreaker for
activists. Instead of trying to reach out to "ordinary people" through an
unreadable sectarian newspaper or an ugly typo-riddled flyer, why not use a
game instead? And games can provide a training ground in the kind of everyone-
wins-or-everyone-loses-so-let's-all-work-to-win logic that participatory
society projects aspire to build. It might be an easier segue from the kind of
games we could encourage to the larger new systems we do encourage in
economics, politics, kinship, and community.  
  
One argument against pursuing solidarity gaming is that nobody's going to be
interested in non-competitive games because they're NOT FUN. But just because
a game is competitive is no guarantee that it'll be fun. Likewise, just
because a game follows a solidarity logic doesn't mean it has to be dull. It
all depends on the game.  
  
So what could be some specific examples of solidarity gaming? Let's turn to
the Winter Olympics. If you take, say, alpine skiing (the first listed sport
on the Vancouver 2010 list of Olympic sports), competitive gaming has athletes
take turns trying to run the slalom or downhill, with the hopes of trying of
going as fast as possible, and certainly faster than other athletes, for an
unshareable gold medal. A solidarity gaming version of alpine skiing might
have athletes running slalom all working to achieve a collective shared skiing
time that the competitors themselves decide on in advance. If they achieve it,
all the competitors win gold. If they don't, none of them get it.  
  
On my ZNet blog, I've written about a game called Solidarity Poker (rules are
online here: [http://bit.ly/bHET3q](http://bit.ly/bHET3q)), and at meetings of the Chicago Area
Participatory Economics Society I've taught and played Solidarity Scrabble
(players play Scrabble but work together to cover the eight Triple Word Score
squares on a Scrabble board -- if they do so, they all win; if they don't they
all lose).  
  
Solidarity Gaming at first might sound overly strict, a tad uninspiring,
perhaps hokey, but it would be an extension of this solidarity logic to a
sporting and gaming environment. One day it may even extend beyond mere sports
and games, to help build the solidarity that humanity may need for survival in
a precarious future.  
  
_Mitchell Szczepanczyk is a radio show host, TV producer, and political activist on media issues. He co-founded the group CAPES (the Chicago Area Participatory Economics Society) and has organized events with CAPES around the model of participatory economics._

