{:title ""Corporate Media Control and Media Reform Struggles" - A Presentation at Third Unitarian Church, Chicago"
:layout :post
:tags  ["media"]}

_The following is the full originally planned speech given on "Corporate Media Control and Media Reform Struggles" at Third Unitarian Church, Chicago. An abridged version of the presentation was what was actually given at the church because of time constraints, but the full remarks deserve to be shared, and so I post the full presentation here._  
  
The author Stephen Pinker aims high in his book _The Language Instinct_ when
he writes in the introduction of his book: "I want to debauch your mind with
learning". And I hope that this presentation will likewise provide a
debauchery of learning. The title of this presentation is "Corporate Media
Control and Media Reform Struggles", so I will provide a capsule history of
media in the United States, focusing on the corporate control of media in the
United States and the struggles to counter that, running through the present
day, even alluding to events that occurred last month. The presentation is
divided roughly by medium: print and newspapers, the telegraph and telephone,
movies, radio, television, what I call "cross-media concentration", and the
internet, with some summarizing remarks at the end. I will keep a roughly
chronological flow in this presentation though I reserve the right to time
travel, jumping on occasion from the past to the future and back again.  
  
But even in a capsule history, it's quite possible that you may find a lot of
what I have to say overwhelming, perhaps in the sense of feeling helpless in
the light of seemingly unending corporate control across generations, but also
that my presentations have an all-you-can-eat approach to facts and details.
The point is not to dazzle you with my knowledge of media and history, nor is
the point to make you feel helpless in the face of a seemingly unbeatable foe.
The point is to share a sampling of the work on struggling for a better media
in the United States in the hopes of inspiring you to join in this work and
empowering you with this story, especially given the central role media play
in all struggles for a better tomorrow and the successes that we have won,
with hopefully more to come. Some of what's here might be familiar; much of
what I have to say will probably be unfamiliar to most of you, but I will be
more than happy to elaborate on whatever points. With everything what I say
today, I can go into MUCH greater detail; just see me after class. Moreover,
I'm making this presentation available on the internet in both written and
audio forms for subsequent review and sharing on my website at www.szcz.org  
  
We begin our story with the founding of the first national media network in
the United States, though many people today don't consider it a media
resource, yet it was incredibly critical for forging an open and diverse
discourse in the early United States for the better part of 70 years. I'm
referring to the post office. Most of the post office's traffic before 1840
was newspapers; the percentage of postal traffic that was newspapers grew from
70% in 1794 to over 90% in 1832. Indeed, in the early days of the American
republic, it was given that a democratic society required as wide a realm of
discourse, and that the post office should be subsidized by the government to
encourage that discourse. Some even thought that all postal traffic should be
free, but a relatively modest tax was implemented to fund the post office
subsidy. Indeed, many social justice movements of the early 19th century,
including the growing abolitionist movement, credited these post office
subsidies for their growth of their own efforts. That the government
subsidized the relatively open medium of the post office lies in stark
contrast to the history of the telegraph, which we'll discuss in a moment.  
  
For much of the 19th century, in the larger American cities, a great many
newspapers were published, making for a vibrant media scene. A city the size
of St. Louis circa 1880 had as many as ten daily newspapers, and the barriers
to entry were comparatively low so that it was possible for new newspapers to
launch and succeed. I remember seeing a presentation some years back about
Chicago newspapers circa 1910, and which showed a sampling of five Chicago
Socialist newspapers published in Polish, and that's just the narrow subset of
Chicago, socialism, and the Polish language, never mind other cities, other
languages, other political points of view. Indeed, one of the most popular
national newspapers of a left persuasion, a Socialist newspaper from Kansas
called _Appeal to Reason_ had two million subscribers at its peak. But the
newspaper industry would face a change -- the involvement of commercial
advertising, and the concomitant introduction of nonpartisan reporting. With
the reliance on commercialism, the costs for maintaining a newspaper rose,
reliance on sources of wealth grew as did corruption and outright lying, and
newspapers that couldn't find those sources of wealth or refused to swim in
this sordid sea wound up shutting down. Most American cities by 1920 became
one or two newspaper towns. (Indeed, there are now fewer than twenty cities in
the United States with more than one regular daily newspaper.)  
  
There's a big connection with the 19th century newspaper industry and the
telegraph, which we'll see momentarily. The modern electric telegraph, most
everyone knows was patented in 1844 by Samuel Morse. What's not so well known
was that Morse was a professional portrait painter whose wife Lucretia had
died and was buried while he was away on a business trip. Shortly thereafter,
Morse threw himself into the then-infant field of telecommunications, and with
the help of advances in the science of electricity and other technical
advances, was able to perfect the single-wire telegraph, allowing for far
faster communications than before. But the fate of its widespread use, unlike
that of the post office, wasn't slated for nationalization by an indifferent
Congress in 1844 and the growing power of capital in 19th century America,
exemplified by the burgeoning railroad industry. Instead, the telegraph was
itself subject to market whims, at first with more than 50 different
telegraphy firms, which ultimately consolidated into a single firm, Western
Union. The 19th-century robber baron Jay Gould wound up through some clever
stock maneuvers, seized control of Western Union.  
  
Critics had feared that a monopoly of the telegraph could lead to unfair
advantages in stock transactions. But another problem regarding corporate
control of the news also would emerge, starting from a coalition of five New
York newspapers who pooled their funds in 1846 to share the costs of telegraph
time for the transfer of urgent news. This group called itself the New York
Associated Press, which grew over time to encompass the country, dropping the
"New York" part of its name, becoming the Associated Press and working out
an exclusive arrangement with Western Union and becoming the only newswire
service in the United States.  
  
Perhaps the most noted example of the power that Western Union held regarding
news in the presidential election of 1876; Western Union, a pro-Republican
company, supported Republican candidate Rutherford B. Hayes over Democrat
Samuel Tilden. Western Union telegrams reported uncertainty in the electoral
votes in three states, though the popular vote suggested a Tilden win. But
with newspapers and public sentiment following the Western Union lead, Hayes
held the upper hand, and ultimately won the White House. A later Senate
investigation (headed by a Republican) found that the key telegrams were never
reviewed by Democrats but ultimately returned to Western Union and destroyed.
Tilden supporters would punnily referring to the AP as the "Hayessociated
Press".  
  
From 1880 to 1910, calls for nationalization of the telegraph began to grow,
as part of the general populist movement efforts in the United States around
the same time, raising calls to break the "infernal bondage" between the AP
and Western Union. In response, some seventy Congressional bills were
introduced between 1866 and 1900, calling for telegram reform, usually calling
for nationalization. Western Union lobbyists defeated all seventy of those
bills. And the newspapers, especially those aligned with the AP, refused to
accede to the question of nationalizing the telegraph, understandably so given
the dependence on the telegraph for news. Around the same time, a new medium,
one not primarily restricted to big newspapers, stock traders, and other
effete groups, would extend to a greater portion of the population than the
telegraph ever did. That medium ironically enough stemmed directly from
attempts to advance the telegraph, one of whose pioneers was a professor of
phonetics at Boston University named Alexander Graham Bell.  
  
Bell (and particularly Bell's father-in-law Gardiner Greene Hubbard, who had
far more of a nose for business than Bell did) wound up winning the patent
wars for an advance for what was referred to as the harmonic telegraph -- the
idea of transmitting multiple different telegraph signals, or "harmonics",
across a single wire. But those harmonics instead also carry individual sound
frequencies, like those of the human voice, and became known as the
"telephone". By 1877, the Bell Telephone Company and its successor in the
wake of a number of intervening mergers, the American Telephone and Telegraph
company (or AT&T;) would become itself a behemoth thanks to the monopoly
control of that patent.  
  
But after the telephone patent expired in 1894, many many aspiring telephone
groups and cooperatives entered the fray -- the independents as they were
called, would go on to expand telephony service across the country,
particularly in rural environments which were often ignored as not being
enough of a lucrative market. The independents held some 40% of the overall
telephone market at their peak and were starting to do something that AT&T;
didn't do -- innovate. By 1908, AT&T; was in trouble. That's when AT&T;
president Theodore Vail (whose career ironically included a stint in the post
office) began to act -- he deployed a PR offensive with a slogan touting
"universal service", buying out some of the independents, and
"sublicensing" with others for technical preference. That, and a growing
unease with "dual service" (note that the phone lines by AT&T; and by the
independents were incompatible, thus requiring two phone lines for each
household) helped to turn the tide. By 1920, AT&T; controlled 66% of the
market, by 1932, it held 81% of the market and wouldn't look back until the
1980s when an antitrust settlement finally broke the AT&T; monopoly.  
  
During the early 20th century, both the growing telephone industry and
shrinking telegraph industry were facing another rival that neither industry
could do -- show moving pictures. The movie environment in the days of the
silent film era from 1900 to about 1920 was markedly wide open, where
neighborhood theaters sprouted up and the cost of producing short films was
rather low. Thus, many people entered the game of producing and showing films,
including a great many political activists making films related to one or
another cause, including labor activism, women's suffrage, and political
radicalism.  
  
When I was in college, I read the book _The Jungle_ by Upton Sinclair and I
thought to myself that maybe someday someone should make a movie based on the
book. It so happens that someone _did_ make a movie based on the book; the All
Star Feature Corporation made a silent film adaptation of the book _The Jungle_ -- in 1914! -- which even featured a cameo by Upton Sinclair himself.
If you're hoping to see the film today on DVD or something, forget it; there
are no copies of the full film known to exist. But it's an exemplar of the
range of films available to filmgoers about 100 years ago. To be sure, nearly
half of all films during this time were melodramas, but many political films,
even of a very radical character, were certainly part of the landscape.  
  
The first factor in the change of this environment was the Edison Trust, an
effort to monopolize control of American film stock. But the Edison Trust was
stymied by independent film efforts, the growth of new longer feature films,
and the continuing growth of theaters to show those films. The victory over
the Edison Trust was total; not only was the trust ultimately terminated by a
court in 1918, by 1925 all of the companies comprising the trust went out of
business. Yet those independents would from 1920 to 1930 become the new status
quo, with an influence far greater than the Edison Trust ever held. I'm
referring to the Studio System.  
  
What became the Studio System began by an orphaned Hungarian emigre and
furrier named Adolph Zukor. Zukor and his business partners opened a chain of
film arcades along the East Coast, then organized a film production company
(the Famous Players Film Company) then signed a distribution contract with
Paramount and through various maneuvers secured control of all avenues of
making movies -- production, distribution, and theaters -- far more than the
Edison Trust ever held. Zukor's involvement with Paramount lasted clear
through to the day he died in 1976 at the age of 103.  
  
That formation of Paramount spurred a trend of consolidation within the film
industry in the 1920s. And many of the main players in what would become the
Studio System came from hardscrabble backgrounds like Zukor: Harry Warner, a
founder of Warner Brothers, was an emigre clothier from Poland who got into
films when a nickelodeon opened near his store and did better business than
his clothing store. William Fox was another Hungarian emigre who got into
textiles and sold a textile company to start his first nickelodeon. They and a
handful of others like Carl Laemmle and Harry Cohn from Germany, and Louis
Mayer from Russia, were among those who stood atop the eight film companies
from the ensuing consolidation: the Big Five as they were known (Fox,
Paramount, Warner Brothers, Radio-Keith-Orpheum (or RKO), and Loew's [the
parent of MGM]) as well as three other "majors" -- Universal, Columbia, and
United Artists.  
  
As part of their effort against the Edison Trust, the independents used the
production of longer feature films, which by virtue of their length, cost more
and required more film. That among other factors resulted in forming barriers
to entry in the film market -- films that could be produced for perhaps $1,000
in 1920 would by 1930 cost upwards of $40,000 (not to mention the new
requirements for sound in films -- _The Jazz Singer_ in 1927 cost $500,000 to
produce). Plus, with the creation of elegant movie palaces by the Studio
System across America, the ante for costs raised further. And labor unions and
radicals simply couldn't afford to compete with such higher costs, compounded
by the markedly reduced ideological range in films coming from the Studio
System, meant many radical and oppositional filmmakers struggled to survive,
and many did not.  
  
Mind you, in 1928, this could have changed dramatically despite these attacks;
a proposal by a movie electrician, Patrick Murphy, could have turned America's
labor temples -- then about 1500 in number -- into the largest movie
distribution chain in America. But labor leaders at the time were dismissive;
they regarded this proposal as "secondary" to the work of "real"
organizing efforts, not sympathetic with the potential of movies to inspire
and encourage activism, and with labor rank-and-file not willing or able to
force the matter on the table, the Studio System was triumphant (at least
until the 1940s and 1950s when the Supreme Court ordered the breakup of
production and theater chains). Ironically, Upton Sinclair who ran for
governor of California in 1934 narrowly lost thanks to no small part because
of a series of rigged newsreels produced by MGM and directed by Hollywood
"boy wonder" Irving Thalberg.  
  
It was around the same time when a new medium caught the attention of a nation
and a movement for media reform struggles. The struggle over radio in the
1920s and 30s may have marked the high-water mark in media reform struggles in
American history. Radio stations were once licensed by U.S. Department of
Commerce, headed in the early 1920s by then Commerce secretary Herbert Hoover
(who later became president). And radio in the 1920s was dominated by hundreds
of nonprofits and universities. But a court ruling in 1926 invalidated all
radio licenses since there was no Congressional authority to grant radio
licenses, which led to a free-for-all of the radio spectrum. Congress in
response hurriedly passed the Radio Act of 1927, which authorized a government
commission, the Federal Radio Commission (FRC), to authorize new radio
licenses.  
  
The FRC was dominated by commercial interests related to radio manufacturers
and its general counsel was Tribune Corporation attorney Louis Caldwell, but
there was a wide distaste for advertising on radio, and skepticism that
advertising could even provide a viable funding base. Nevertheless, the FRC,
joined up with the trade association of commercial broadcasting, the National
Association of Broadcasters (which was founded in the Drake Hotel in Chicago
in 1922), along with two incipient radio networks -- the National Broadcasting
Company (the result of RCA buying AT&T;'s broadcasting properties), and the
Columbia Broadcasting System (bought and nurtured by a Chicago-born cigar
manufacturer's son, William Paley) -- to craft with almost no outside
involvement a 1928 reallocation of radio licenses to give the choicest
frequencies and strongest broadcast strengths to commercial broadcasters.  
  
For the next seven years, a coalition of civic groups fought back, and
included educators (like the Payne Fund and a coalition founded in Chicago in
1930, the National Coalition for Education on Radio), as well as organized
labor (exemplified by WCFL, a Chicago radio station owned and run by the
Chicago Federation of Labor) along with religious groups (exemplified by the
Missionary Society of St. Paul the Apostle of New York, better known as the
Paulist Fathers, who ran their own station WLWL), all inspired by the positive
potential of radio and examples of national nonprofit radio broadcasters like
the BBC in Britain and the CBC in Canada.  
  
The U.S. commercial broadcasters responded back fiercely -- undercutting the
opposition, setting up front groups, granting broadcast time to politicians,
seeing their audience widen while the opposition's audience shrank, winning
the critical support of the newspaper industry, and defeating efforts in the
early 1930s on Capitol Hill for broadcast reform. Reform efforts nevertheless
continued, including a 1934 amendment which would have allotted 25% of all
radio frequencies under nonprofit use and which came very close to becoming
law. But the commercial lobbying blitz was able to defuse those efforts,
including the use of a rigged 1934 hearing and the 1934 Communications Act
which replaced the FRC with a new Federal Communications Commission (FCC) and
placed as sacrosanct the commercial bias of broadcasting. The coalition of
civic groups unraveled, some disbanded, and the dream of national nonprofit
radio was dead.  
  
But the complaints continued and the FCC was shamed to some reform actions.
Antitrust sentiment in the 1940s resulted in an FCC Report on Chain
Broadcasting which led to NBC spinning off one of its radio networks to become
the American Broadcasting Company (ABC). And a portion of the new FM radio
band was allotted to noncommercial broadcasters; that's how the Pacifica radio
network began in the 1940s by Quaker pacifist Lew Hill, and would serve as a
beacon for improving radio and ultimately broadcasting. But as focus turned
from radio to television (and I'll be talking a LOT about TV momentarily), the
relative influence of radio shrank and radio stations starting gaining more
local autonomy but still remained for the most part commercially biased.  
  
The 1980s saw the emergence of low-power FM radio (LPFM), thanks to the
reduced cost of radio broadcasting equipment, and to noted radio activists
like Free Radio Berkeley founder Stephen Dunifer, and a blind activist, Mbanna
Kantako, who used a one-watt radio transmitter to broadcast to his public
housing project in Springfield, Illinois. The FCC cracked down on the
burgeoning unlicensed (so-called "pirate") broadcasters. But it was too easy
to start a new LPFM station and the FCC found it increasingly harder to crack
down. So the FCC ultimately proposed a licensed LPFM service which passed
Congress in 2000 but, thanks to a sneaky lobbyist maneuver enacted literally
in the dead of night, the number of potential stations was reduced from
thousands to hundreds. Nevertheless, LPFM supporters were undaunted, despite
two subsequent failed attempts to restore those stolen LPFM stations over a
decade of struggle, and finally, on December 18, 2010, Congress approved the
long-overdue expansion of LPFM.  
  
But radio back in the 1950s was the sideshow to the main media phenomenon --
television, a medium long hyped with positive potential. My favorite quote is
that of David Sarnoff, the founder of NBC, who in 1939 said "It is probable
that television drama of high caliber and produced by first-rate artists will
materially raise the level of dramatic taste of the nation." And there was
some struggle over the direction of TV, but from which industry would call the
shots -- would it be the radio industry who had the leg up on one-to-many
broadcasting, would it be the movie industry which was versed in the visual
oervre? The public was barely involved in the decision, and the result was
shamefully corrupt: In 1946, FCC chair Charles Denny (a Democrat!) pushed for
a plan giving near-monopoly control of TV to NBC and CBS; six months later
Denny left the FCC to become an executive and general counsel at NBC, tripling
his salary.  
  
But efforts to chip away at that monopoly control continued in the coming
years, including ironically from the FCC itself. In the 1940s, the FCC
proposed a strict proposal of public interest broadcast obligations called the
Blue Book, which helped to lead to policies like the Fairness Doctrine which
sought to break tedium of perspectives on the airwaves. Newton Minow, FCC
chair under President Kennedy and Northwestern University alum and later
faculty, gave a 1961 speech entitled "Television and the Public Interest" to
the National Association of Broadcasters, where he decried television as a
"vast wasteland." (TV producer Sherwood Schwartz later admitted to naming
the S. S. Minnow from the show _Gilligan's Island_ as a jab against Minow the
FCC chair.) Minow pushed through a mandate that all TV sets receive UHF
signals, thus opening the possibility for more stations. That, as well as the
burgeoning social movements in the 1960s, and a critical 1967 report by the
Carnegie Commission on Educational Television, helped break the resistance of
the NAB to the establishment of public broadcasting in the U.S., resulting in
the passage of the Public Broadcasting Act, only 45 years after the
establishment of a public broadcaster in Britain.  
  
But the independent financing potential of public broadcasting in the U.S. was
muted when a proposal to fund public broadcasting using an excise tax from the
sale of TV sets wasn't included in the final act. Public broadcasting thus
became the ugly stepsister to its commercial brethren, getting that
programming that the commercial broadcasters can't make any money off of. Some
of that potential was ultimately realized with the establishment of public
access broadcasting on cable TV which did accord more independent funding and
thus greater autonomy (this is of particular interest to me since it was a
public access TV show in Michigan that awakened my own involvement in media
and media policy). And cable TV, along with satellite television later,
widened the number of ostensible TV channels available to a wider public. But
concurrent with that trend there occurred another trend from about 1980 on of
the shrinking of ownership across the entire media landscape -- to the point
that (quoting from a USA Today article) just "seven companies -- CBS, Disney,
Discovery, Fox, NBC Universal, Time Warner and Viacom -- account for about 90%
of all the professionally produced video that people watch."  
  
As we've seen, there was media concentration before the 1980s but for the most
part that concentration was restricted to a small number of players within a
given media industry. In the 1980s, companies started to build conglomerates
across media industries, so that it wasn't just a TV producer _or_ film studio
_or_ newspaper publisher -- it was a TV producer _and_ film studio _and_
newspaper publisher, and much more besides. The raison d'etre was, as usually
is, profit -- more profit can be generated by producing content once and then
redistributing it across all one's channels, so then a race was underway to
consolidate media across industries, aided by zealots in government
subscribing to supposed "free market" principles but instead aiding and
abetting the greatest media monopolies heretofore seen.  
  
The greatest chronicler of this new consolidation trend was Ben Bagdikian,
former editor at the Washington Post and dean emeritus at the University of
California Berkeley Graduate School of Journalism. In 1983, Bagdikian
published a book called _The Media Monopoly_ which noted that just 50
companies commanded the lion's share of American media and that the trend was
to consolidate further, perhaps to as few as six media companies. The book was
republished in updated editions seven times in the next two decades to
chronicle the continuing changes in the American media landscape; by the time
the seventh edition came out in 2004, Bagdikian was wrong in one respect: it
didn't get down to as few as six media companies, in that book he listed just
five.  
  
Bagdikian and many others also chronicled the negative consequences of such
concentration: increased commercialism, less journalism, less independence
from the bottom-line, more conflicts of interest, fewer diverse perspectives,
and even life-or-death situations, as was the case in the city of Minot, North
Dakota, which in 2002 saw a chemical leak from a train derailment cause
hundreds to be hospitalized and when local police tried to get on the radio to
alert the public, they found six of the seven Minot radio stations controlled
from a single Clear Channel office which was unstaffed at the time of the
leak.  
  
The response to this trend of media concentration crystallized arguably the
most dynamic, successful, and inspiring media reform effort in a generation:
the media ownership uprising of 2003. The trend towards greater media
concentration was critically enabled at the federal government, spurred to
greater heights (or depths, as it were) through the 1996 Telecommunications
Act and the FCC of George W. Bush, headed for four years by market zealot
Michael Powell (son of former secretary of state Colin Powell). The Telecom
Act required the FCC to review its media ownership rules every four years, and
in 2002 the FCC to little fanfare announced that it would likely amend a
number of critical media ownership rules in part of its continuing effort to
"deregulate" the media, which would have made the trend of consolidation
seen thus far look tame by comparison. And with key pro-big-media Republicans
in key points in the government, the major media virtually mute so as to cash
in big, and a considerable history of media reformers' hopes dashed from one
medium to the next, the fix looked to be in.  
  
It was this fight where I first cut my teeth on media reform struggles, but
what happened wasn't just me and didn't just happen overnight -- it was the
efforts of scholars and activists, well before I joined the fray, going back
decades. But I arrived when this fight found a moment to crystallize. Small
groups throughout the country including here in Chicago started organizing;
five of us in Chicago met a week before the FCC announced its media ownership
rule revisions. This coincided with the formation in Chicago of the group
Chicago Media Action and efforts like a Halloween walking tour of Chicago,
helping to organize an unofficial hearing at Northwestern University, sending
a team to Richmond, Virginia, to the only public FCC hearing on the matter,
getting on CAN TV and in community newspapers to discuss the issue, and of
course using the internet, without which the effort to stop the FCC may never
have happened at all.  
  
After months of nonstop outreach and activism, what did it amount to? On its
face, the FCC nevertheless to little surprise voted 3-2 on June 2, 2003 to its
proposed rule changes. But the public outcry was palpable, breaking FCC public
comment records by orders of magnitude, as the issue ranked as the second-most
popular news issue of 2003 (trailing only the launch of the War in Iraq), and
the corporate media were caught flat-footed, facing losing votes in Congress
and on September 3, 2003, an emergency court order stayed the FCC decision,
just one day before the rules were slated to go into effect. That court order
remained in effect for seven years, and it's no exaggeration to say that it
prevented a bad media system from becoming far worse. The Tribune company,
which gambled its future on the media ownership rules, whined on its editorial
pages over the outcome. Indeed, that stay indirectly resulted in a shareholder
revolt forcing a change of ownership leading to local billionaire Sam Zell
taking charge and later running the company into bankruptcy -- a situation the
company finds itself mired in more than two years later.  
  
But the whole episode was revealing and inspiring. Activism works, even on
something as seemingly abstruse as media policy where seemingly few outside of
those who stand to profit from such policies seem to understand or care about
such policies. The key to victory has been, ironically enough, the very thing
that make the media unique on this issue -- they're the only ones who command
the ability to debate their own politics. As a result, those politics are
immensely corrupt, so bringing wider awareness to them, by any and every means
at your disposal, turns out to be an effective tactic (sunlight really is the
best disinfectant).  
  
The lessons learned by media reform activists in 2003 came into play again in
2006 during what's called the Net Neutrality wars over the internet. That
struggle came in the wake of a number of policy decisions involving the
internet -- including what some scholars deem to be a key 1990 invitation-only
gathering of government and tech firms at Harvard University which apparently
resulted in the government privatizing part of its internet backbone. The
Michael-Powell-led FCC took another step in 2002 by reclassifying the internet
in such a way that weakened common carriage provisions of internet content.
And when a court challenge to undo that reclassification failed at the Supreme
Court in 2005 in the famed Brand X case, corporate ISPs salivated at the
chance to pass legislation in their favor to establish a "two-tiered"
internet as it's called.  
  
That legislation came in 2006, entitled the COPE Act, and not only would have
changed the internet as we knew it, it would also irreparably affected public
access television through the establishment of a single national cable
franchise. The bill sailed through the House, aided to no small extent by
Illinois' own Bobby Rush, the bill's first Democratic co-sponsor (who it was
reported got a $1 million gift from SBC to establish a community internet
center in his district -- a center that as far as I know has yet to be built
nearly five years later). Nevertheless, awareness of what was going on started
to build and widen, mostly using the internet and this newfangled technology
called "blogs". Plus, protests were gaining more and more attention,
including a national series of protests in May 2006 which began in Chicago
called the National Day of Outrage.  
  
The house passed the COPE Act, but when it got to the Senate, internet freedom
advocates with the wind at their backs were able to egg some Senators on to
ask critical questions about the COPE Act, which led to a famous rambling
response by the Senate's lead shepherd on telecom policy, Alaska Senator Ted
Stevens, in which he called the internet a "series of tubes". Note that
Stevens actually achieved his goal -- he got the COPE Act out of committee in
the Senate, yet the PR fiasco of his remarks made the legislation too volatile
to bring up to a full Senate vote, and the COPE Act died through inaction in
the end. Remember though that we saw the same recipe for victory with the COPE
Act as we did in 2003 with the FCC's media ownership rules -- building public
awareness to build public involvement when public awareness and public
involvement are lacking, and letting the chips fall where they may.  
  
In 2006, then Illinois Senator Barack Obama noted his support for network
neutrality, which he reiterated on the campaign trail for the White House. In
2009, then President Obama appointed former telco executive Julius Genachowski
chair of the FCC and tasked with approving a network neutrality bill,
particularly since the FCC lost its authority to enforce network neutrality in
March 2010 after the FCC tried to enforce network neutrality against Comcast
in 2007 and Comcast sued and won to overturn the agency's authority. And just
last month, on December 21, 2010, the FCC implemented a net neutrality rule,
but one which has been roundly criticized as being too weak and full of
loopholes. The struggle on this will continue, as it always does.  
  
So now that I have debauched your mind with learning, what are some of the
"big picture" points that can be raised? Let me mention five lessons.  
  
Lesson Number One: The problems with the media that people complain about are
problems are nothing new. Consolidation of the media, the creeping influence
of commercialism, exclusion of whole areas of debate and of communities to
have a say, people were worrying about this in 1869 as they were in 2011.  
  
Lesson Number Two: American media don't just fall from the sky. They're the
result of a number of factors -- most critically, the policies that help to
shape the media. While the major media would like you to believe that the
media spring from "natural" processes, there's nothing natural about them;
they're often very bitterly fought.  
  
Lesson Number Three: People can affect those policies, and I'm not referring
to high-paid well-connected lobbyists -- everyday normal people can affect
those policies. Indeed, a number of defeats that we had seen in points of the
media reform struggles were by narrow margins and if things had gone slightly
differently those losses could have been wins. On the other hand, a number of
reform wins that we can claim, especially in recent years, came when those
efforts had no right to do so, but because people were willing to do the work
in organizing, outreach, smart planning, and in a word, getting involved. The
more people get involved in shaping those media, the better our chances for
success.  
  
Lesson Number Four: Don't dismiss the power of media and media policy in
whatever activist work you are interested in; very often, the connections are
just begging to be made. That labor leaders who dismissed Patrick Murphy's
proposal to turn America's labor temples into a movie distribution chain were
wrong: media work is real work. Indeed, so many social justice efforts hinge
on public awareness and involvement for their success, so media work may be as
real as any issue ever is.  
  
Lesson Number Five: We have to work to changed institutions that affect media
but aren't media. We seem to be stuck between two obsolete institutional
frameworks that have affected media and much else for centuries -- a single
government, the state, in the political sphere, and a single market, spawning
corporations, in the economic sphere. Much of the struggle for a better media
have meant struggling in one, sometimes both, spheres. In order to ensure a
better media, and much else besides, those institutions must be changed, at
the very least rethought. There has been a rich tradition of thinking on this
front, and a great many new theoretical developments, much of which has been
maligned as heretical understandably by those with power. But I think that a
better media requires better political and economic institutions. What those
might look like, how the media would look and operate in that front, and how
such institutions can be achieved fall outside of the scope of this
presentation. But we do ourselves no favors to ignore the question forever;
indeed, by tackling this, we may well be on our way to far greater successes
tackling corporate media control and winning in media reform.  
  
Thank you, and I look forward to your questions and comments.

