{:title "The meta-competition for a participatory society"
:layout :post
:tags  ["economics"]}

The models for a [participatory society](http://www.iopsociety.org) are
grounded in an ethos of solidarity rather than rivarly. We believe it is
better for ourselves and our planet to explicitly help one another rather than
harm one another. And we believe we have some concrete models of our values in
order to put our values into some kind of tangible, everyday practice.  
  
The models in our present society -- those of racism; patriarchy, sexism, and
heterosexism; the state; and the retentionist economies of capitalism,
markets, and command planning -- are all grounded in an ethos of rivalry.
Every person for oneself (every man for himself?), to hell with the rest. Upon
examination or actual practice, these models of rivalry often result in
destructive ends, which are claimed to be necessary or the best options
currently available.  
  
Here's a question: If they are the best options _currently_ available, why not
seek out better options? And if better options are found why not try them out
to see if they're worthy of our time and attention?  
  
The answer is ironic in multiple ways, and what follows could be a bit
confusing so stay with me here. Advocates for a participatory society, which
use models based on solidarity, are effectively calling for a _competition_
between their models of solidarity and the current models built on rivalry.
But it appears advocates of the systems of rivalry _don't_ want a competition
between their models based on rivalry and the models based on solidarity
because, one would surmise, their models would lose in any fair assessment.  
  
Put more succinctly: The solidarity folks want a rivalry with the rivalry
folks because they (the solidarity folks) think they can win, but the rivalry
folks don't want a rivalry with the solidarity folks because they (the rivalry
folks) think they would lose.  
  
More succinctly still: The "non-competition people" want a competition, but
the "competition people" don't.  
  
When the "competition people" complain about those who don't want to play
their game of competition (at least when it comes to economics), they would
howl loud complaints of "protectionism". But when it pitting their
supposedly vaunted models and values against other more positive models, the
"competition people" shy behind the very same protectionist cloak.  
  
So, those of us who strive for a more participatory society, and believe we
have the models to put theory into practice, we _want_ to compete, curiously
enough, because we think we can win. And not only would _we_ win, so would the
planet and its peoples and future untold generations.  

