{:title "Why are people selling guns online and skirting the law?  Are they in economic dire straits?"
:layout :post
:tags  ["economics"]}

The New York Times (in a long-delayed [follow-up from Mother Jones magazine](http://www.motherjones.com/politics/2013/01/want-buy-gun-without-background-check-armlist-can-help)) finally reported on a story of recent
relevance that would have made an impact, on the same day that anything
resembling meaningful gun control reform in the United States got squelched by
the U.S. Senate. When president Obama called for a vote, he wound up getting
_nine_ votes in the the U.S. Senate this week, only to see them all go down in
flames.  
  
The New York Times reported on the vibrant and massively secretive market for
firearms purchased online. The Times found that 94 percent of the 170,000 gun
ads posted on an online buying forum called Armslist were made by "private
parties". Such a classification didn't require background checks or the
keeping of records, and purchases can be made in cash. To quote from a post
from [Daily Kos](http://www.dailykos.com/story/2013/04/17/1202452/-This-is-the-gun-market-at-least-41-senators-want-continued-because-to-curb-it-would-tick-off-the-NRA):  
  
>  The Times found many of those private parties seemed to be acting instead as gun dealers without licenses, selling significant numbers of firearms. They do so without running background checks on any of the people they sell do. Nor do they keep records of their sales. As the newspaper points out, where the line is drawn about what makes a dealer and what makes a private seller is blurry.  How many guns can someone sell before becoming what the law calls "person who devotes time, attention, and labor to dealing in firearms as a regular course of trade or business with the principal objective of livelihood and profit."  

And Armslist is one of many, many such online buying forums for guns, the
majority of purchases would fail elementary checks for checking backgrounds
and record-keeping.  
  
I'd like to make two points:  
  
1\. This is a critical example of the fallacy of ignoring market
externalities. Market theory considers only the buyer and the seller in a
purchase of a good, like guns. (Maybe it should be called a "bad" rather
than a "good" in this case?) But there can be, and probably will be, serious
externalities paid for by people who had nothing to do with the immediate
purchase. Not to put too light a point on it, but twenty-six dead people at
Sandy Hook Elementary School for a single purchase is a serious externality,
even if the purchase was ostensibly legal. In markets, such externalities are
ignored, to the detriment of everyone. In contrast, in a participatory
economy, the metric of indicative prices would include the immediate
predictable consequences of a good, like guns. In the case of someone getting
killed by a gun that someone bought secretly online, those indicative prices
would include a metric of "social cost", which would understandably escalate
the cost of the good, dramatically so. Hopefully, the rising cost would reach
the point where many "buyers" in a participatory economy would decline to
"purchase" the good on the grounds of the cost being too expensive to
afford, to the benefit of those affected by the exchange but not taking part
in the exchange. If anyone should consider a turn away from markets and
towards a participatory economy, this stands as an enormously powerful reason
why.  
  
2\. In light of the report, I can understand why some people sell guns. With
little oversight otherwise either on legal or economic grounds, selling guns
can be a quick way to earn some cash, and without the typical constraints of a
standard job -- no boss to worry about, no punch card to check in, just sell
your guns online and enjoy your cash and/or pay your rent. In some
circumstances, it's probably the only way some people can to earn some cash,
especially given the lousy economy and eroding position of the middle and
working-class. So people sell guns. The situation reminds me of a quote from
the extraordinary movie
[Bulworth](http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0118798/), and a scene near the
end of the film where a drug dealer explains why some people go into the risky
but lucrative role of selling drugs:  
  
> I'm giving them entry-level positions into the only growth-sector occupation that's truly open to them right now. That's the substance supply industry. They gonna run this shit someday. They gonna have the whole empire. Man, y'all don't give a fuck about it. You greedy-ass politicians. That's what you tell me every time that y'all vote to cut them school programs; every time y'all vote to cut them funds to the job programs. What the fuck; how a... how a young man gonna take care of his financial responsibilities workin' at motherfuckin' Burger King? He ain't. He ain't, and please don't even start with the school shit. They ain't no education goin' on up in that motherfucker. 'Cause y'all motherfuckin' politicians done fucked the shit up.  So what they gonna do? What's a young man supposed to do then, right? What's he gonna do? He gonna come to me, that's what he's gonna do.  

