{:title "[insert here random ramblings on food, gamification, activism, and parecon]"
:layout :post
:tags  ["economics"]}

I help produce a monthly television show -- Chicago Independent Television,
the monthly TV series of the Chicago Independent Media Center ("Chicago
Indymedia"). In the most recent episode of the show, we had a segment about a
corrupt Chicago politician -- Alderman James Cappleman -- who decided to crack
down on "unapproved" efforts to feed hungry people in his ward
(neighborhood). Citizens in his ward then staged a protest of Cappelman's
aldermanic office in defiance. That protest included a public "feeding": one
of the Chicago "branches" of the anti-hunger group Food Not Bombs offered
food at the protest for anyone, homeless or not, hungry or not.  
  
In watching this segment, I was set thinking: "Wow. These volunteer activists
are defying the local political system for what they believe with just the
resources they have at hand. If there was a way that they could get other
volunteers and other activists to help contribute, with resources and
assistance... They could engage in socially-valued labor, and maybe even earn
credit for their effort and sacrifice, and track the tasks that they do, make
sure that they're balanced for desirability and empowerment, and coordinate
larger requests with other groups, and -- HEY, WAIT A MINUTE!"  
  
That was what inspired me to want to create a participatory economics
simularity, and hopefully help bridge a variant of C. P. Snow's famous "two
cultures" argument. But instead of bridging the sciences and the humanities,
who too often don't connect with one another much to their (and our)
respective, detriment, I'm talking about another cultural divide that I've
seen among activists -- those who "talk" versus those who "do".  
  
Some activists who are engaged in "getting their hands dirty" -- feeding
hungry people (like Food Not Bombs), defending unjust foreclosurers (like
Occupy Our Homes), trying to build a trauma center on Chicago's south side
(like Fearless Leading by the Youth) -- will critique other activists who
don't get involved for not getting involved. Such criticism is often
justified, but I feel that, a lot of the time, the nose-to-the-grindstone
activism that does take place fulfill its potential. People much of the time
don't know about it, or efforts fizzle out over time or after a big event
(e.g., the biennial WTO Ministerials or the 2012 NATO Summit), or the campaign
doesn't get enough in the way of resources to keep going, or isn't part of a
larger cohesive whole and feels like just another random act.  
  
This, I think, is the highest calling of "armchair" activism -- to help
provide that support, in getting wider attention, providing resources,
offering strategic advice, any of the sundry "abstract" tools that can help
in any and every way with those efforts. I just wonder aloud if we can go
beyond, so that the activism involved in, say, helping to provide food for
Food Not Bombs can be somehow incentivized more effectively, but in solidarity
fashion. So that those who want to help can be incentivized _to_ plug in,
offer help.  
  
Here's where I state my personal bias yet again: I saw the videos of an online
course on Gamification, and if anything it got me thinking: I wonder if
political activism can be "gamified" in a constructive manner, or maybe even
an entire participatory economy can be "gamified", to help provide
incentives that might help spur the action that we sorely need to address
pressing problems and ultimately to transform society for the better.  
  
People could find out about the protest at Cappleman's office and get a reward
of credit for providing food, cooking some of the food, providing it to
protesters or to the hungry. That credit could then be offered to those who
are also participants in activism, to do or get -- what exactly? Exchange to
provide others? How is that different from a credit market? I suppose the
credit earned would need to be balanced for desirability and empowerment with
effort and sacrifice at some other tasks, and the credit could be offered to
those who agree to be part of this economy, who themselves provide goods and
services that are balanced for desirability and empowerment. Maybe start out
with some smaller subset of work tasks for desirability and empowerment,
rather than a whole new economy?  
  
It might go somewhere, but I think I need to think through the details a bit
further.  
  
(Note to self: Next time you write a blog post, be sure to have some overall
point or structure in mind _before_ starting to write.) 

