{:title "The Koch Brothers and the Media"
:layout :post
:tags  ["media"]}

_This is the transcript of a presentation I gave at the Oak Park Main Library in Oak Park, Illinois, on October 27, 2013_  
  
In this presentation, I would like to answer two main questions: One, what is
the present American media footprint of the Koch brothers? Two, what would
have happened if the reported Koch buyout of the Tribune's newspapers had been
completed?  
  
To help answer both questions, I will invoke the "propaganda model" -- the
institutional analysis of the political economy of the media, as described by
Edward S. Herman and Noam Chomsky in their 1988 book "Manufacturing
Consent". The model posits five filters that are connected with what the
media report as news; those five filters can be described as funding,
sourcing, negative feedback (what's called flak), ideology, and ownership.  
  
This model serves as a useful framework to determine the American media
footprint of the Koch brothers. The first filter, funding: The funding
resources of the Kochs -- who have a combined net worth estimated by Forbes to
be around $50 billion dollars -- are considerable. A cursory review of the
business press during even numbered years reveals reports of large TV ad buys
from Koch-connected organizations: $6 million here, $3 million there, another
$28 million there... I emphasize _even_ numbered years because American
elections routinely fall on even numbered years, and the purchasing of
electoral ads is one of the few remaining viable sources of money keeping
broadcast commercial radio and TV afloat, even profitable. But outside of
elections, the Kochs have plenty of businesses willing and eager to buy ad
time, given their vast holdings in oil, gas, refining, chemicals, fertilizers,
paper and forest products, and whose commercial brands include names like
Brawny, Angel Soft, Dixie, and Stainmaster Carpet. I have not been able to
find how much commercial ads the Kochs regularly buy; those details have yet
to be compiled, but it's not a stretch to say that it is noticeable. Certainly
commercial media would be wise not to cross the Kochs' path, lest that funding
stream get reduced.  
  
The second filter: Sourcing -- On this score the Kochs are grandmasters,
having poured in tens of millions of dollars in the establishment of think
tanks, most notably the Cato Institute which was founded in 1974 by Charles
Koch and was originally named "The Charles Koch Foundation" until it was
renamed as Cato in 1977. The Kochs in 2012 poured upwards of $29 million into
such think tanks, which provide what sources provide -- the ideas,
commentators, and soundbites for coverage in an underfunded and overworked
media establishment.  
  
The third filter: Flak -- An arsenal of astroturf groups like the Koch-founded
Americans for Prosperity and the Koch-funded Americans for Tax Reform (run by
Grover Norquist) offer supposed "grassroots" support for the ideas of those
"think tanks". Millions more Koch dollars are poured into such initiatives
which, when opposed by a comparatively paltry funding base for any opposition,
gives marked heft to those same ideas.  
  
The fourth filter: Ideology -- One of the most dominant ideologies in the
present day, as noted by propaganda model co-founder Edward Herman, is that of
"the free market". As to free markets, the Kochs have long been advocates of
a libertarian free-market ideology. In fact, David Koch himself was the Vice-
Presidential candidate on the Libertarian Party ticket in 1980.  
  
I should mention that the lines I'm drawing among these filters are fluid;
some entities can be classified in multiple filters. Flak groups like
Americans for Prosperity themselves provide a great deal of funding in the
form of massive TV ad buys. The think tanks themselves incessantly echo the
ideology that help keep supposedly neutral journalists in line. But this
analysis helps with understanding the considerable footprint of the Koch
brothers in American media.  
  
There's one piece that's missing from this puzzle: the fifth and final filter,
ownership. It's a missing piece that even folks on the right have noted -- The
New York Times quoted one conservative activist who said, "A running joke
among conservatives as we watched the G.O.P establishment spend $500 million
on ineffectual TV ads [in the 2012 elections] is 'Why don't you just buy
NBC?'"  
  
In April 2013 the L.A Weekly and the New York Times reported that the Koch
brothers were planning to get into the ownership game, with an envisioned
buyout of the Tribune Company's eight newspapers. On this matter, it should be
noted that the very reason the Tribune put its newspapers up for sale is
directly traceable to the efforts of media reform activists, including me, to
block a series of key FCC policies in 2003 that would have dramatically
escalated media concentration in America in a matter of months AND which the
Tribune was gambling its very future on. When activists blocked those
policies, the Tribune had no Plan B and that led to a sequence of events that
resulted in, among other things, a bankruptcy and breakup of the Tribune and a
planned selloff of its remaining newspapers. The market value of newspapers
across America has plummeted to as little as a tenth of their previous value
even just six years ago, thus making it trivial, from the perspective of the
multi-billion-dollar spreadsheets of the Kochs, to buy out a newspaper chain
or two.  
  
Why did the Kochs back off? To be sure, there was considerable flak against
the deal once it was announced, which engendered protests by groups that
previously had little skin in media issues. But most critically, the Kochs
probably determined that they wouldn't have been able to complete the deal. A
consortium of public pension funds controlled by public sector labor unions
held considerable stock in two of the three stakeholder firms controlling the
Tribune, Oaktree Capital and Angelo Gordon & Co., who took co-ownership of the
Tribune during its bankruptcy proceedings. In effect, a transfer of the
Tribune's newspapers to the Koch brothers would have to be approved by a bunch
of public sector workers, a great many of them unionized, including teachers,
fire fighters, and municipal employees in California, Pennsylvania, Ohio, New
York, and Illinois. If word were to spread, these firms would flex their
muscle and veto the sale before it faced the rubber-stamps of the FCC and FTC.  
  
As to the second question I posed in this presentation: What would have
happened if the reported Koch buyout of the Tribune's newspapers had somehow
been completed? The Tribune would have been able to complete the Grand Slam of
the Propaganda Model by filling the last hole in the model -- ownership. It
would have owned some of the largest and most influential newspapers in
America. As much of a footprint as the internet has made in our media
ecosphere, the fact remains that very little original news about the world
actually is generated by internet-only publications. Most of the news is
generated by what's left of our journalism, and that means newspapers like
those owned by the Tribune actually still hold considerable heft.  
  
That heft, as research has shown, is less about what news media telling you
what to think, and more of what news media tell you what to think _about_. The
Koch brothers would like you to ignore the social, political, economic, and
environmental calamities of our time (escalated to no small extent by the very
things that have made the Koch brothers rich), but those calamities will be
increasingly hard to dodge and harder to explain away under the increasingly-
discredited ideology of "free markets". The Koch brothers would look even
more out-of-touch, but in the meantime as the world goes to hell their
coverage -- or lack thereof -- certainly wouldn't help at a time when we need
every little bit.  
  
But the Kochs won't buy the Tribune's newspapers, at least in the short term.
The Kochs are instead stuck in neutral with their vast sums of money, army of
think tanks, influential astroturf groups, and an ideology that holds sway for
the moment but is increasingly becoming dismoored. (Like the quote about
Muhammad Ali after he lost his crown: "What did the man say? 'Loser and still
champion.'") What do we do about the Kochs? That's a huge topic for a
separate speech or even for someone to build a career around, but let me offer
this advice: We can't be afraid to think big, to offer sweeping bold
proposals; we're in historically uncharted times, at a time when today's idea
could be tomorrow's reality, for better or for worse. For example, I've been
blogging lately about one such bold proposal -- to abolish the markets that
fuel corporations like Koch Industries and replace them with a concrete vision
of democratic planning. Time prevents me from elaborating on this now (we can
discuss it in Q&A;), but it is a discussion that I feel is long overdue. Thank
you.

