{:title "A (more) detailed proposal for parecon's indicative prices"
:layout :post
:tags  ["economics"]}

"Every economy has prices." I remember Robin Hahnel saying those words in one
of the [Shed Sessions produced by the folks at Z Magazine](http://www.zcommunications.org/zvideo/main) on participatory economics. What those prices reflect, and how those prices are calculated, can
vary from economy to economy.  
  
The prices in contemporary capitalism reflect mainly two things: (1) supply
and demand, taken as a single entity, and (2) bargaining power. Bargaining
power can reflect power relations between buyers and sellers, or between
capital and labor, or even between sellers in a market (ask any small-town
merchant about Wal-Mart and about the bargaining power of _its_ prices).  
  
Markets make primal the interaction between buyer and seller, but clearly a
lot is missed in the price, mainly because markets tend to _ignore_ anything
that doesn't immediately reflect the immediate interaction between buyer and
seller. It ignores, among other things:  
  
1\. The labor costs related to the exchange. Ask Foxconn and Apple (irony: I'm
typing these words on an Apple computer). Ask Nike and sweatshop shoes (heck,
Nike [has a chronic allergy](http://www.globalexchange.org/sweatfree/nike/stillwaiting) to
even acknowledging its labor practices). Ask Wal-Mart and its labor force
(motto: "There's a reason we're the world's most profitable company.  We pay
our employees peanuts. Wal-Mart: Always low wages. Always").  
  
2\. The social costs stemming from the purchase. I used to posit a
hypothetical example in discussions about parecon by using firearms as an
example. It's not a hypothetical anymore, at least not in the minds of most of
the American public.  
  
3\. The environmental impacts connected to the purchase. This might be the
kicker -- the thing that might be most closely pinned to the destruction of
the human species if we don't change course. The purchase price of oil in its
doesn't reflect the pollution that's emitted, the harm to breathing and to
animals, the destructive impacts of a warming planet by burning fossil fuels
(The Onion's "Man on the street" once described it as follows: "The health
of the economy demands that we destroy the planet.") I used to have a poster
that listed the revised sticker price for a standard automobile IF the costs
of wars connected to oil were taken into account -- in the ballpark of
$150,000 for a car that would otherwise cost $8,000. (War is a hell of an
externality.)  
  
Why are such numbers ignored? Presumably because market economists want to
make their model simple and manageable. I can understand the willingness to
make a simple model for analysis. After all, if you don't strive for
simplification, you could be chasing will-o'-the-wisps all day, spending all
the time hunting down numbers and avoiding having to make a decision. But
while simplicity is sought for, so is _accuracy_, and the fact remains that
while market economists stick their head in the sand, the ignored labor,
social, and especially the environmental costs are kicking their elevated
behinds.  
  
In contrast, in a participatory economy, the prices that are used are what are
termed "indicative prices" -- meaning that they strive to _indicate_ the
various impacts of one or another choice. Markets ignore the effects beyond
the immediate market exchange, and in fact there's a name for these outside
effects: _externalities_. They are clearly external -- outside -- the
immediate exchange, and markets therefore ignore them. To their and our
detriment.  
  
This isn't a call to skirt decision-making. Far from it. Of course, we could
seek, but we should base indiciative prices on best available knowledge at the
time. Indeed, in one of the [very first articulations](http://www.zcommunications.org/zparecon/pepe.htm) of the
model of participatory economics, "prices are 'indicative' during the
planning process in the sense of indicating the best current estimates of
final valuations. They are not binding but flexible in the sense that
qualitative information provides important additional guidance."  
  
But the model, and future articulations of the model, don't specify what
_should_ go into an indicative. Based on what's discussed here, let me offer
the following four-component model of indicative prices in participatory
economics:  
  
1\. Supply and demand  
2\. Known labor impacts  
3\. Known environmental impact  
4\. Known social impacts  
  
The greater the negative impact of each component, the higher the component
price and the overall price. How is negative impact determined? One way using
current technology would be to use a cellphone app for people to add in their
vote regarding the impact (positive or negative) for a given good. The results
can then be aggregated and calculated to an indicative price component and
ultimately affect an indicative price. (I have a set-up like this that's used
in my -- cross your fingers! -- forthcoming participatory economics
simulacrum.) In the event technology could be considered a hurdle, there's no
reason other means could be used in a similar fashion to contribute to an
indicative price.

