{:title "Why I Won't Blog"
:layout :post
:tags  ["science"]}

A blog (short for "web log") is a type of diary on a website, with the most
recent diary entries at the top of the site and older entries further down
and/or archived. A blog is typically automated in a way to allow one to
quickly post thoughts and observations without having to handle icky computer
code. Blogs on the Web are explosively popular: one survey on The Economist
website said that (as of July 2002) there are some 500,000 bloggers worldwide
and growing, due in no small part to a number of easy-to-use blogging services
like [www.blogger.com](http://www.blogger.com) and the easy-to-pronounce
[www.xanga.com](http://www.xanga.com).

And I'm not falling for it.

Hear me roar: I won't blog.

There's one very compelling personal reason for me not to blog--computers have
already taken over my life. I work full-time in IT, I study as a part-time
graduate student in the University of Chicago Department of Computer Science,
I already have two personal websites of my own, and I volunteer my time with
pro-bono web work for two (perhaps soon to be three or four) organizations.
<cold feet>As you can see I've got a lot going on in my life right now and I'm
just not ready for the kind of commitment that a blog calls for.</cold feet> I
hope I can be forgiven for doing other things in my life. Like the quote
attributed to Groucho Marx: "Lady, I love my cigar, but I take it out of my
mouth every once in a while."<1>

Insufficient time aside, there are some technical reasons to be suspicious of
blogs. For one, blogs appear to be database-driven. I haven't seen this in
detail, but I strongly suspect that blog entries are input into a database and
then output through a web page, order by time_of_last_change descending, limit
some_number_of_most_recent_entries. (It takes one to know one: I spend a lot
of my time at work with database-and-webpage interaction.) Databases can aid
organizing large-scale amounts of information chronologically, but those
entries seem to be put into some distant service that I can't readily access.
Some might not care, but if I'm going to input my energy into something, I
want some measure of control of the substance behind my work.

And the information in a blog is, most of the time, singly indexed, only by
time. To be sure, you can change that to include other indexes (by category,
say), but that might take some time if you've got a lot of entries over years.
Or you can search through a blog's archive to find some nugget you want, but
that might take some time if you've got a lot of entries over years. Then
there's the matter of some new technology coming along and throwing a
monkeywrench into the whole edifice and having to convert your blog to
accommodate it if you want, but that might take some time if you've got a lot
of entries over years.

It's another matter entirely of how often you or anyone will actually return,
or need or want to return, to past blogging efforts of yours. This might be a
matter of balancing quality of product versus quantity of production versus
time and resources spent. Still, it's a sad and recurring tune in other
technologies. In TV: Scientific American reported in an April 2002 article on
TV-watching that most of what people videotape is never viewed a second time.
In print: newspaper and magazines tend to pile up. As one headline from the
January 31, 2002 issue of The Onion put it: "Stack of Unread _New Yorkers_ Celebrates One-Year Anniversary."

One question that should be asked before blogging begins: how much do one's
efforts add to the overall experience of the web, or to others, or more
importantly to one's life? (That's a question that should be asked by more
people more generally.) If you can make a blog and make it work, great. But
even if you have a non-blogged website, you already have instantaneous and
potentially worldwide reach of your thoughts and observations. Blogging
doesn't add to it in my view, and might even detract from it. So I choose not
to be assimilated by the Blog Borg.

<1> Whether or not Groucho actually said this quote is the topic of some
heated controversy. For a fascinating discussion of the debate, see [http://www.snopes2.com/radiotv/tv/groucho.htm](http://www.snopes2.com/radiotv/tv/groucho.htm).

