{:title "Notes on \"Open Source: A Revolution in IT and Economics\""
:layout :post
:tags  ["indymedia"]}

### A Workshop by Mitchell Szczepanczyk at the Autonomous Zone, November 9,
2002

_I feel like I dropped the ball in terms of my participation in the Chicago 2002 protests and actions against the Trans Atlantic Business Dialogue.
Respecting my family's objections, I didn't partake in the main protest in downtown Chicago on November 7, 2002, nor did I organize a protest of my own against a November 8 conference at the University of Chicago celebrating the 90th birthday of Milton Friedman. My meager involvement in the anti-TABD actions consisted of giving a workshop at the Alternative Economics Summit on the Open Source movement. I wrote up the following summary of my workshop._

(1) Basics of Open Source

Open Source refers to an approach towards intellectual products of creation,
most commonly (but not exclusively) exemplified by computer software. (That's
what the "source" in Open Source refers to: the _source_ code of a computer
program.) Open Source does not necessarily mean free from cost: open source
products may be bought and sold. But roughly speaking there are two key
characteristics of Open Source products that distinguish them from proprietary
intellectual works:

One: Anyone is permitted to examine the workings, the guts of an Open Source
product.

Two: Anyone is permitted to change or modify the guts of an Open Source
product, on the condition that whatever changes that occur also become Open
Source. (At least in the GNU Linux Open Source model. Other Open Source models
may vary.)

These characteristics are guaranteed through a General Public License, which
codifies the terms of Open Source.

For more information about Basics behind open source, look at:

  * [The GNU General Public License](http://www.gnu.org/copyleft/gpl.html)
  * [Open Source Initiative](http://www.opensource.org)

(2) Open Source in computers

The Open Source movement really began with computers, and continues to make
its most impact on the computer industry. Open Source reflects the ethos
toward computing common in pioneering computer research during the 1960s and
1970s. The ethos was one of shared resources and shared work. Anyone could
look at anyone else's code for furthering of learning, research, ideas. Plus
there's the added advantage of peer review: you can discover and fix my
mistakes, and I yours. It was this very openness which helped lay the
foundation for such computer advances as the Internet.

Contrast this with the ethos of computers as a business. Any business, like oh
say Microsoft, would naturally strive to maximize and privatize profits. The
privatization aspect logically extends to privatization of intellectual
products, the code in the case of computers, so that only those affiliated
with a company can get at the code. This can give proprietary software a
disadvantage, since the code can only benefit from a small set of company
employees, working under a profit motive (which isn't necessarily the same as
a performance motive).

One key player in the Open Source vs. Big Business arena with the Linux
Operating System. Linux (pronouned LINN-icks) is named for Linus Torvalds, who
in 1991 as a student at the University of Helsinki, wrote an operating system
kernel and, in a bold move, made it Open Source. Since then, thanks to a
decade of open peer review and open innovation, Linux has grown into a full
fledged family of stable, productive operating systems. As one gauge of
Linux's success: In 2001, RedHat Linux (a commercially sold type of Linux)
accounted for some 24% of desktop systems sales (in contrast to Microsoft
Windows' nearly 50% market share). Microsoft CEO Steve Ballmer has been quoted
in the New York Times as describing Linux as a "cancer".

For more information:

  * [Linux.org](http://www.linux.org)
  * [The Cathedral and the Bazaar](http://www.openresources.com/documents/cathedral-bazaar/) (about the differences between open and closed approaches to software) 

(3) Open Source outside of computers

Open Source is not the exclusive domain of computers. Here are some non-
computer examples of Open Source:

[Wikipedia](http://www.wikipedia.org/)  
This is an Open Source, free encyclopedia. Anyone can contribute articles on
new topics, or edit articles that have already been submitted.

[Open Cola](http://www.colawp.com/colas/400/cola467_recipe.html)  
Coca-Cola's recipe is a trade secret, kept in a vault in the company's
headquarters in Atlanta. OpenCola's recipe is written right on every can.

[Open Law](http://eon.law.harvard.edu/openlaw/)  
No, not all lawyers are power-hungry secretive bastards. Here's a forum at
Harvard for crafting laws that actually help people.

For more information, see New Scientist magazine's [article](http://www.newscientist.com/hottopics/copyleft/copyleftart.jsp) on Open Source, which
itself is released on an Open Source basis.

(4) Limitations and future directions of Open Source.

It's been my experience that Open Source tends to work best with things that
change a lot or need to change a lot, like computer programs or recipes or an
encyclopedia. Open Source doesn't really work well with static things like
published books.

But here's an Open Source idea for someone to run with: Open Source Genomics.
A bit of history first: Thanks to biology-ignorant judges who served in the
U.S. Court of Appeals and the U.S. Supreme Court in the early 1980s, it is
possible for private corporations (like Novartis, DuPont, and Monsanto, all of
whom have devoted serious efforts in recent years to biotech) to patent
lifeforms. So, a corporation could set up bioprospecting in countries with a
lot of biodiversity (Brazil or Indonesia, for example), harvest some
biologically rare and unique plants or animals or humans, sequence their
genome (that is, figure out their genetic codes), and claim those sequenced
genomes as a patentable invention.

But Open Source offers a possible way to fight back. Someone could go to these
biodiverse areas of the world, sequence the genomes first, and then _declare that sequenced genome Open Source_. That way, corporations would not be able
to declare monopoly patent rights, even for a time, on a lifeform for the sake
of private profit. Anyone and everyone could benefit from the sequenced
genome. One way to do this might be to launch a university initiative of Open
Source Genomics, since universities have the necessary combination of computer
scientists and conservation biologists to pull this off.

What other directions could open up in this Open Source adventure? Who knows?
Open Source could prove to be an amazing resource with untapped potential and
promise for freedom and creativity and leveling the playing field. Your ideas
and genius could foster unimagined directions in Open Source. Get involved.

* * *

These notes are copyleft (c) 2002 by Mitchell Szczepanczyk. These notes may be
freely copied, redistributed, retransmitted, or otherwise used or modified
provided that this copyleft notice is preserved. "

