{:title "Congress Hotel Workers Escalate Strike with with Civil Disobedience, Arrests"
:layout :post
:tags  ["indymedia"]}

Amid a morning of heavy rain, striking workers at the Congress Hotel made
history by engaging in the first civil disobedience in front of the Congress
Hotel. The action occured on Labor Day near the corner of Congress Parkway and
Michigan Avenue in downtown Chicago.

At 10:51am, on September 1, 2003, twenty members of the striking union (Hotel
Employees and Restaurant Employees, Local 1), wearing light organge plastic
rain ponchos, sat down across Michigan facing north, with arms interlocked.
With hundreds of fellow strikers and media personnel watching, police
immediately broke up the protest. The twenty were greeted with cheers and
singing as police then escorted them to two police paddywagons parked in front
of the Congress Hotel.

The action was preceded by a number of brief speeches. The first was given by
noted labor historian and Pulitzer-Prize-winning author Studs Terkel, who
accused the owner of the Congress Hotel as being a "neanderthal." Other
shorter speeches followed, including one given by Chicago Federation of Labor
President Dennis Gannon, and another given by Marvin Daniels, one of the
striking workers who also was one of the twenty arrestees.

The Congress Hotel strike is itself also a historic first--the first hotel
strike in Chicago history. The strike began on Father's Day, June 15, 2003,
when Congress Hotel management unilaterally imposed a contract that mandates a
7% wage cut, unlimited right to subcontract and no raise for four years. In
contrast, all of the other 24 downtown Chicago hotels won a contract
settlement which included a 54% increase in wages and benefits for the life of
the contract.

In another irony of history, Labor Day weekend 2003 marks the one-year
anniversary of that historic hotel contract settlement, which even saw then-
Illinois-governor George Ryan partake in the negotiations.

Members of the union anticipated the twenty arrestees to be released later in
the day.

The picket line for the Congress Hotel strike will be held for the duration of
the strike each day from 4am to 11pm at the Congress Hotel, 520 S. Michigan
Ave., downtown Chicago.

