{:title "How the Digital Millennium Copyright Act affects you"
:layout :post
:tags  ["science"]}

_"Coding is not a crime." -- Anonymous_

You might be unfamiliar with the Digital Millennium Copyright Act. By the end
of this essay you will be familiar with this act and learn how, through this
law, the University of Chicago Press--and particularly the Astronomy Group--
might get sued.

The Digital Millennium Copyright Act (DMCA) is a 1998 law which extended
copyright in the U.S. Code into the sphere of digital technologies. Extending
copyright to protect intellectual property is one thing, but the DMCA has
gotten heat for granting copyright holders too much power. (It's unclear to me
whether or not this excess of power was intentionally granted by the DMCA's
crafters or an unforeseen consequence; it could be both.) One particularly
controversial passage is in Section 1202, an anti-trafficking provision, which
forbids anyone from gaining unpermitted electronic access to a copyrighted
work.

On the surface, it doesn't seem that controversial: copyright holders should
have the right to protect their intellectual propery. But the problem is that
the DMCA has given copyright holders the right to sue against both past
criminal acts and against anyone with information which could be used to crack
the encyption code protecting digitally copyrighted works.

Let me repeat that: If you learn or discover information which might be used
to access copyrighted digital material, you are open to being sued under the
DMCA, even if you didn't use--and have no intent to use--your discovery in
criminal endeavors.

And you thought pre-crime was just something in the movies.

Two highly-publicized cases have highlighted the insanity behind this
provision. Dmitry Sklyarov, a PhD student at Moscow University, gave a speech
in Las Vegas in 2001 about security weaknesses in Adobbe e-Book. Sklyarov
conducted his research in Russia (where it's legal there), and he didn't
infringe against any copyrighted material, and he didn't help anyone infringe
against any copyrighted material, and he didn't cite any sensitive details in
his speech on the weakness itself. And yet, because of his speech, Sklyarov
was arrested in Las Vegas and jailed in the USA for three weeks; he was
released but both he and his company ElcomSoft were indicted on five counts of
circumvention offenses. ElcomSoft (a Russian company!) has been hemorrhaging
money in the last two years in DMCA-related legal fees.

Another example is Jon Johanssen, a Norwegian who--in 1999, at age 15--used a
program for deciphering the Content Scrambling System (CSS) used to protect
material on film DVDs. Johanssen faced a criminal charge brought by Norwegian
police at the request of the Motion Picture Association of America; the
specific charge was breaking into property which wasn't his (which was
peculiar since Johanssen owned the DVD whose code he deciphered).

The effect of the DMCA on scientific research is chilling. Computer scientists
or any scientists who use computers have held back publishing their research,
or avoided coming to the conferences held in the United States, or even
abandoned entire lines of research. Science Magazine weighed in on the matter:

> Computer security and encryption researchers are far from the only
scientists who have reason to fear the DMCA. Any data in digital form can be
protected by encryption and other technical measures, and those who distribute
digital data in this manner can use the DMCA to restrict what scientists or
other researchers can do with the data.

The University of Chicago Press, the ASP [the Astronomical Society of the
Pacific], or the AAS [the American Astronomical Society], could find itself on
the wrong side of a lawsuit by publishing computer code. Suppose PASP
publishes some computer code purely intended for research purposes (which has
been already done--see [www.journals.uchicago.edu/PASP/journal/issues/v115n805/203034/203034.html](http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/PASP/journal/issues/v115n805/203034/203034.html)). Suppose further that Henry the Hacker reads
this code and somehow incorporates it in a brand-new CSS descrambler which is
then used to crack the protective encryption on a DVD of, say, The Lord of the
Rings. Then AOL Time Warner (which owns New Line Cinema which made The Lord of
the Rings) could sue Henry (duh!), but they could also sue the ASP and/or the
University of Chicago Press. The possibility of this actually happening is
probably slight, but it's not zero.

However, there is good news: a backlash against the DMCA is afoot. In January
2003, a Norwegian court acquitted Jon Johanssen on the grounds that he owned
the DVD he cracked and therefore was free to toy with the code. As a sign of
increasing digital civil disobedience, Carnegie-Mellon computer science
professor David Touretzky assembled a gallery of CSS descramblers (see it at [http://www-2.cs.cmu.edu/~dst/DeCSS/Gallery/](http://www-2.cs.cmu.edu/~dst/DeCSS/Gallery/)), which flirt with (or cross?) the line between aiding
criminals and freedom of speech. And perhaps best of all, legislation is being
considered to remedy some of the odious parts of the DMCA: the Digital Media
Consumers' Rights Act, which would affirm the legitimate uses of computer
coding and research, is being introduced in Congress. (You can find out more
and get involved at [http://action.eff.org/action/index.asp?step=2&item=2421](http://action.eff.org/action/index.asp?step=2&item=2421))."

