{:title "Public Access at the Crossroads: CAN TV's Funding Crisis Comes to a Head, for Better or Worse"
:layout :post
:tags  ["media" "thirdcoastpress"]}

CAN TV (Chicago Access Network Television, Chicago's fleet of public access
television channels) found itself spending the year 2004 to date stuck in a
struggle for its rightful funding -- a struggle which is poised to come to an
end soon, one way or another.  
  
As Kari Lydersen reported in the March 2004 issue of Third Coast Press, the
cable company RCN defaulted on January 8 on a $215,000 due payment to CAN TV.
This was a sequel of the same old hackneyed script played out more than a year
before when RCN defaulted on a $645,000 payment to CAN TV before public
pressure and threats of city council fines forced RCN to pay up.  
  
But in the wake of the January 2004 fault, Chicago citizens pounced into
action and on February 10, 2004, the Cable Commission approved two resolutions
against RCN -- one for its late payment, a second for having an inadequate
cable construction schedule. The Commission gave RCN until February 20 to
clean up its act; RCN didn't comply. On February 21, the Commission then
cracked down hard by launching a round of fines against RCN totaling $1
million dollars per day.  
  
To justify their default, RCN claimed a sluggish economy and stagnant profits,
even though the City Cable Commission said that RCN was involved in digital
television contracts in five U.S. cities totaling more than $245 million. Even
so, RCN hadn't turned a profit in four years' time, and RCN announced it would
be filing for bankruptcy, thereby seemingly staving off (for the moment, at
least) the accumulating fines.  
  
For the whole time during this dispute, RCN requested to pull out from its
legally binding cable contract with the city. Obviously if RCN succeeded, this
would likely open up a Pandora's box for other companies to do likewise. But
we must be careful not to focus too much on RCN alone. The staredown between
CAN TV with RCN is bad enough. What's worse is that CAN TV is stuck with a
funding structure which assumes a competitive cable market -- each company
pays the same amount of money to contribute to CAN TV, no matter how few or
how many customers it has.  
  
This is becoming a problem because the trajectory of the cable market is
towards a non-competitive environment. It's very likely that a single company
would become Chicago's cable provider and thus become the only company which
would pay fees to CAN TV where before there were multiple companies. Given the
current funding arrangement, this would mean less money for CAN TV in the long
term, even though cable subscriber base continually grows and is now at an
all-time high.  
  
While the city's cable market is forced to play the game of Monopoly, there is
an encouraging new development which would change the rules of the funding
game in favor of CAN TV.  
  
On May 5, 2004, Chicago city alderman Bernard Stone introduced before the city
council an ordinance which would change the funding structure for Chicago
public access television. The proposal is that CAN TV would automatically
receive one-fifth of the city's cable franchise fee. In dollar terms, we're
talking about $2 million dollars from a franchise fee totaling about $11
million per year. This ordinance has a lot of positives. One, it would provide
the financial bedrock for CAN TV for now and the foreseeable future, no matter
which company or companies hold cable contracts with the city. Two, an
arrangement like this is the norm for cable access outlets across the country.
One survey showed some three-quarters of such outlets in the U.S. get more
than half their funds through cable franchise fees. Three, the proposed fee is
not a budget-breaker by any means; it represents about one-twentieth of one
percent of the annual budget of the city of Chicago.  
  
It might be premature to say this (or maybe not), but this ordinance might be
a do-or-die situation for CAN TV. If this ordinance passes and becomes law, it
would fix the funding matter for CAN TV for the immediate and foreseeable
future. If not, CAN TV stands to be hobbled by the funding struggle, reducing
its current budget by some 40%, rolling back to budget levels that CAN TV had
in 1990, and leaving its very future in doubt.  
  
The struggle is underway. There's already some momentum to mobilize community
support for this ordinance. The city council has had some recent history in
voting for positive resolutions and ordinances -- against the 2003 War in
Iraq, against the USA Patriot Act, and unanimously for a diverse media in the
face of the 2003 FCC media ownership fight. Hope is that the city council will
vote in support of this ordinance as well.  
  
You can help. Contact your Chicago city alderman and Mayor Daley ask for their
support Alderman Stone's May 5th ordinance to restructure the funding for CAN
TV. Call CAN TV at 312-738-1400 or visit www.cantv.org/rcn for more
information regarding the latest suggested actions and developments. Don't be
intimidated by contacting your elected officials: it's not that hard, it's not
that long, and a few minutes of your time can make a big difference in helping
to preserve one of the remaining open media outlets in Chicago.

