{:title "We Are Everywhere: Global justice multimedia presentation featured at citywide arts festival launch"
:layout :post
:tags  ["media"]}

On April 18, 2004, Chicago saw the kickoff of Versionfest, an annual festival
devoted to technology, art, and activism. The kickoff took place across three
closely connected Wicker Park art galleries -- buddY, Heaven, and High School.  
  
One of the featured events at the Versionfest opening was a multimedia
presentation called We Are Everywhere, based on a book of the same name. The
book is a sweeping, inspiring chronicle of the protest movements that have
swept the globe in recent years, mainly against transnational economic
institutions like the World Trade Organization, World Bank, and the
International Monetary Fund.  
  
Two of the book's editors, Jennifer Whitney and Andrew Stern, gave the
presentation as part of a continent-wide tour promoting the book. Stern, a
photojournalist, had just returned from Iraq and gave his account of events on
the ground. He showed a photo essay of his travels in Iraq and doled out
advice for activists interested in going there. Whitney, a health-care worker
and organizer involved with the global justice movement, discussed her own
organizing experiences and the growing ties between the global peace and
global justice movements.  
  
The talks were followed by a slide show of photographs and inspiring facts
that appear in the book We Are Everywhere, such as: In the wake of the WTO
protests in Seattle in November 1999, some 600 activists were arrested and
held in custody; in Mexico City, tens of thousands of protesters took to the
streets to protest those Seattle arrests. (The arrestees were later released.)
The Seattle protests helped lead to a historically unprecedented ministerial
collapse days later, and laid the groundwork for a second WTO ministerial
collapse four years later in Cancun, Mexico.  
  
The book is a collective endeavor. It was produced by a team of editors and
included about 55 essays and 150 photographs produced by organizers and
activists around the world. The presentation should have been licensed as an
explosive device, because it was pure dynamite. It showed that people under
repressive conditions and facing astronomical odds can organize to transcend
all kinds of boundaries to build a better world. Peter Jackson should be
commissioned at once to make a nine-hour film adaptation of the book, and
Chicago organizers of all activist stripes should draw hope, inspiration and
lessons from We Are Everywhere.  
  
_Learn more about Versionfest at [versionfest.org](http://www.versionfest.org); you can learn more about the book We Are Everywhere, published by Verso Press, at [weareeverywhere.org](http://www.weareeverywhere.org)._

