{:title "Struggling for the Soul of WTTW: Public Broadcasting Going Private"
:layout :post
:tags  ["media"]}

Chicago's major PBS affiliate, WTTW-TV Channel 11, spent 2003 as a veritable
punching bag in a twelve-round bout. The first blow against the station
involved allegations of financial impropriety, particularly regarding CEO Dan
Schmidt's extravagant $288,000 salary and Lexus bonus. It became a one-two
punch with layoffs of at least 56 jobs, a quarter of the station's workforce
since January 2002. Add to this slugfest an accounting scandal where charges
of embezzlement fly to the tune of $600,000.  
  
Then there was a lengthy feature article in the July 27, 2003 issue of the
_Chicago Tribune Magazine_. The article reported how Schmidt's vision for WTTW
may have led to financial disaster. _Tribune_ reporter Jim Kirk described a
vision of synergistic programming collectively called Network Chicago -- "An
interlaced structure of television, radio, a newspaper, the Internet, and
public events". But after three years of promotion and $22 million dollars of
investment, the newspaper tanked, funding sources for the other ventures dried
up, and Network Chicago remains little more than a vision. As a result, WTTW
faces possibly the worst financial crisis in its nearly 50-years history.  
  
But there's still more to the story. Though the _Tribune_ didn't mention it,
Schmidt's Network Chicago was a tool for increasing corporate control of
WTTW's programming -- a fact known since the plan was unveiled, and detailed
in a report published in 2000 by the Benton Foundation, an advocacy
organization devoted to public broadcasting policy. That report said that key
commercial and government interests (who already command the media landscape)
would play active roles in programming, defining "real success" by
"bring[ing] on board partners from the business, commercial, and government
sectors of the community".  
  
The corporate tie-ins are already underway. The report described a "budding
relationship" with the _Chicago Sun-Times_, and both the Sun-Times and the
Tribune (the Jim Kirk magazine piece notwithstanding) provide journalists to
contribute on WTTW programs like such as Chicago Tonight, Chicago Stories,
Artbeat Chicago, and the latest offering, Sound Opinions. It's a symbiotic
match: The _Tribune_ and _Sun-Times_ get increased visibility and prestige,
while WTTTW gets to rub elbows with rich funders and let the corporate boys
provide analysis and commentary and little added cost.  
  
And what does the public get in this "public" broadcasting? Damned little.
**Consider the following:**  
  
**No African-Americans host any of WTTW's regularly scheduled locally-produced shows.** Indeed, if the local programming on WTTW resembled anything like the actual demographics of the city of Chicago, a serious portion of programming would serve Hispanic, Polish, and Chinese Chicagoans. But serving the breadth of Chicago communities is simply not the aim of WTTW, and WTTW even said so openly. Dan Schmidt told Chicago Tribune Magazine in 1999: "It's a misnomer to call us public television. It implies that we're like the public library system. We're a non-profit cultural institution, like the Chicago Symphony." That same 199 article also reported: "The target audience [of WTTW] is Baby Boomers and their children."   
  
**The board of directors for WTTW (which governs the station's broadcast license) has a decidedly unwholesome representation of high-ranking corporate officials, including reps from Boeing, Exelon, and Verizon.** Little wonder the points of view of poor, working-class, and union Chicaogans are considered utterly inconsequential at WTTW. While business, Wall Street, and conservative perspectives have regular shows, WTTW has no shows about labor or workers rights in the City of the Broad Shoulders. Moreover, the board itself is self-electing and self-selecting, so heretofore neglected viewpoints may well remain neglected.   
  
**The one non-business political show on WTTW with a backbone--NOW with Bill Moyers--is evidently a hot potato for the station**. The show has been subject to erratic scheduling changes. While many stations air NOW on Friday nights, WTTW has moved the show to early Sundays. Even the airing of episodes is erratic; some episodes of NOW never get aired in Chicago.   
  
**WTTW is heavily prone to adcreep--more on-air commercials, or should I say "underwriting"?** In fact, WTTW carries a bit of historical infamy as being the only station fined by the FCC for excessive commercialism. Maybe I'm old-fashioned here, but I thought the whole point of public broadcasting was to shave off some of the 20,000-plus ads we see every year.   
  
**The only avenue for public input into the station is a Community Advisory Board, which is a dead end.** There is no mechanism in place to make the board's decisions affect the station's overall trajectory.   
  
Arguably, the linchpin to all of these issues is that the station's funding
streams are increasing corporatized and commercialized. But taking this route
is almost a necessity because of long-standing endemic funding problems to
public broadcasting in this country.  
  
The United States never had much of a public broadcasting system, unlike a
great many countries around the world which began with broad-based public
broadcasting services, like the BBC in the UK or the CBC in Canada. These
stations are funded by a licensing system. People have to be licensed to own a
TV or radio, those license carry a fee, and those fees pay for the media
system.  
  
Instead, the U.S. got out of the public media starting gate in about 40 years
after most of the rest of the industrialized world, and the funding scheme was
restrained. A plan to implement a limited licensing system was itself scuttled
under corporate pressure. That's why public stations have pledge drives and
have to pitch their programming to the well-to-do. Sure, WTTW could air
programming serving labor unions, poor Hispanics, and African-Americans, but
those are constituencies which (in the opinion of WTTW) don't have much money
to give during pledge drives. Moreover, they're not not the preferred target
audience of corporate underwriters -- upscale Baby Boomers.  
  
At this point, I'd like to raise a red flag of caution, and it's due to a slew
of red ink. There is a possibility that WTTW, saddled with increasing debt and
precarious finances, would sell its coveted broadcast license to some
commercial firm, and thereafter drop its pretense about being a public
resource. TV broadcasting licenses are a coveted resource, and can fetch
hundreds of millions of dollars.  
  
But the situation is also ripe for change in a more positive direction. We've
seen the beginnings of this change. In Chicago, a group of some 40 activists
met with WTTW in March 2003. The activists were hoping to launch a series of
documentaries and public forums, particularly including critical perspectives
on the then-impending war against Iraq. The station had aired similar programs
in the past, but not in 2003. The station dropped the ball on the proposal,
and more generally on the issues of poor and working class Chicagoans. But
pressure continues and will likely escalate.  
  
Immmediate tangible proposals which could improve the situation are now on the
table. Firing Dan Schmidt and enact a government audit of WTTW for starters.
Others propose replacing the current board with a less corporate directorate,
whose members serve brief, staggered tenures.  
  
In case you think this is a pipe dream and that WTTW and PBS are forever in
the realm of the Dark Side, remember that in early 2003 the FCC's media
ownership policies were considered over and done, but a year later they're
more like well-done. That success came to pressure, education, organizing, and
activism. The same recipe could be in store in 2004.  
  
The current struggle for public broadcasting in 2004 could prove to be a
bellwether in the future trajectory of WTTW, and perhaps set an example for
PBS affiliates nationwide. WTTW and PBS could finally meet the mission for
public broadcasting as articulated by the Carnegie Commission on Educational
Television in 1967 -- to serve as a "forum for controversy and debate" and
"provide a voice for groups in the community that may otherwise be unheard."  
  
_Special thanks to James Owens and Larry Duncan for their contributions to this article._

