{:title "Illinois Coalition Wins State-Level Telecom Victory"
:layout :post
:tags  ["indymedia"]}

Citizens groups and consumer advocates in Illinois claimed victory on May 31
as both houses of the Illinois General Assembly approved an extension of the
state's main law on telephony and the internet.  
  
The Illinois Telecommunications Act was slated to expire in 2005. A proposed
rewrite -- SB 1700, the "Telecommunications Reform Act of 2005" -- evoked
popular concern. The bill appeared to grant considerable advantages to
dominant telecommunications companies, including reductions in public service
obligations and protections against price gouging. While the bill passed the
Illinois State Senate, it didn't advance in the Illinois State House.  
  
The Illinois House instead advanced an alternate bill, SB96, which extended
the state's current Telecommunication law through July 1, 2007, along with the
assorted consumer protections which would have otherwise been eliminated.  
  
The Illinois House approved the bill, 110-0-2, on May 31. The Illinois Senate
followed the House lead by voting SB96 into law with a 58-0 vote. The bill
becomes effective immediately.  
  
John Gaudette, a public interest lobbyist with the Illinois Public Interest
Research Group, commented: "This is a significant victory for the consumers of
Illinois. Despite major lobbying by SBC, Verizon, Midsize telecoms, and a
number of telecom industry groups, the consumer groups were strong enough to
stop the constitutionals from generating a compromise and strong enough to
stop the Chief Senator Sponsor from ramming this through both chambers."  
  
Gaudette wrote comments in an email posted on the mailing list of Get Illinois
Online, a coalition of Illinois consumer and community groups dedicated to
public interest concerns involving telephone and the internet. The group was
also working on preserving the rights of Illinois communities to establish
community internet initiatives.  
  
Such community organizing on telecom issues nationally is paying off. Besides
this Illinois victory, anti-municipal telecommunication bills have been
successfully fought off at the state level in Iowa, Texas, and Florida.  
  
The struggle is now extending to the federal legislature. U.S. Representative
Pete Sessions of Dallas has introduced legislation in Congress to impose a
national ban on municipal-level community internet networks.
