{:title "Efforts succeed - for now - to delay bill to kill Illinois community internet"
:layout :post
:tags  ["indymedia"]}

Community organizers feared that a Illinois State Senate bill to obliterate
the right municipalities to establish their own high-speed municipal internet
networks would have been called this week before the Illinois State Senate in
Springfield.  
  
But in a last-second turaround, the bill's sponsor did not make the call amid
a flurry of increased this week attention critical of the bill.  
  
Illinois State Senator Steve Rauschenberger, the Assistant Republican leader
of the twenty-second district, was slated to call Senate Bill 499, which says
in part that "No political subdivision of this State shall provide or offer
for sale, either to the public or to a telecommunications provider, a
telecommunications service or telecommunications facility used to provide a
telecommunications service."  
  
A flurry of negative media coverage and organizing brought increased attention
to the bill and its uncompromised wording, which may have contributed to
Rauschenberger's about-face. The issue was covered in a number of print and
online media outlets, including the Chicago Daily Herald, Muniwireless.com,
Slashdot, and The NewStandard.  
  
A coalition of citizen and community groups under the umbrella designation Get
Illinois Online have been working on the issue, and continue to organize and
mobilize to amidst a struggle in 2005 which will see a rewrite of the state's
main legislation concerning the internet and telecommunication.  
  
In 2004, the Supreme Court affirmed the political right of states to establish
their own community internet ventures. Thus, major telecommunications
companies have been forced to lobby state by state to repeal this right and
hand over captured markets to companies like SBC and Comcast, as is already
done in fourteen states nationwide. Senate Bill 499 would have done that in
Illinois.  
  
Annie Collins is the chairman of a campaign called Fiber For Our Future which
works on municipal internet in suburban Chicago, followed the progress Senate
Bill 499, and was expecting to drive down to Springfield to offer testimony
against the bill when she heard that the bill would not be called.  
  
Nevertheless, Collins fears that the bill could still be in play in a "poison
pill" maneuver, which would bury the bill in another "must-pass" bill and thus
indirectly bring into law the municipal-internet-killing bill.  
  
"I think they are going to try and bury this so no one finds it," Collins
noted in an email.  
  
The "must-pass" bill in question is the Telecommunications Rewrite bill SB008.

