{:title "Chicagoans Compete in Inaugural Transatlantic Quiz"
:layout :post
:tags  ["trivia"]}

Contact: Mitchell Szczepanczyk  
Email: mitchell@szcz.org  
  
CHICAGO -- Chicago's best trivia mavens will take part in an international
quiz competition along with other Americans against trivia experts in Canada
and the United Kingdom in a first-of-its-kind transatlantic trivia
competition. The event, named "The Transatlantic Quiz", will feature
participants in all three countries taking the same 240-question written test.  
  
Chicago will take part in this quiz on Saturday April 14, at 12 Noon, at
Kasey's Tavern, 701 S. Dearborn. At the same time, trivia competitors in
London, New York, Ottawa, Jacksonville, Madison, and Boulder will also take
the same exact quiz -- in person, rather than online. Since the competition
encompasses three countries at once, the test will cover a wide array of
topics -- culture, entertainment, history, lifestyle, media, sports, science,
and the world.  
  
The Transatlantic Quiz will feature two of the premiere quiz competitors in
the world: 74-time Jeopardy campion Ken Jennings, and Europe's premiere quiz
player, World Quizzing Champion Kevin Ashman, their first head-to-head
matchup.  
  
The questions for the quiz are balanced among the three competing countries
and developed from the USA by Ray Hamel, reference librarian and crossword
puzzle constructor, NY Times Trivia Master, and Quiz writer for "Pages"
magazine. Questions from Canada have been developed by Paul Paquet, trivia
writer through Triviahalloffame.com for clients such as Microsoft Encarta and
MTV Europe, head writer for World Trivia Night, and a writer for merchandising
of "1v100" and "Who Wants To Be A Millionaire". The questions from the UK
have been developed by Chris Jones, former civil servant and winner on "Who
Wants To Be A Millionaire" who now works full-time for Quizzing.co.uk.  
  
The Chicago event is free, but quiz participants are asked to support Kasey's
Tavern, which has graciously agreed to host the event. The Transatlantic Quiz
is a precursor for the World Quizzing Championships, which take place June 2,
2007.  
  
For more information, visit www.transatlanticquiz.com and
iqausa.googlepages.com
