{:title "Markets, corporations, and parecon: A presentation for the Albany Park, North Park, Mayfair Neighbors for Peace and Justice"
:layout :post
:tags  ["economics"]}

In this presentation, I'll address four questions pertaining to our economy.
(1) What are some of the problems? (2) What solutions have been proposed? (3)
What solutions would I advocate? (4) What can we do? This presentation is
divided into four sections, one for each of these four questions. Note that in
keeping with the panel I'll be focusing on the economy and economics, and if
there's something here that's unclear or confusing, please ask after the
presentation.  
  
**Section One: What are some of the problems?**   
  
The economic problems we face are unarguably systemic. Among the gravest of
them are the disproportionate role that limited-liability corporations with
rights of personhood pose to humanity and the planet. Government regulations,
one entity that might serve as a check and balance to corporate power, are
often handmaidens for corporate interests and stepping stones to corporate
interests. Pick any broad realm you choose: the environment, war and
militarism, labor rights, energy, education, media -- chances are very good
that one or more corporations have a stranglehold of control and progress.
Thus, a great deal of activism rightly targets corporations.  
  
Another consideration is the economic institution of markets, where buyers and
sellers are pitted against one another. Corporate dominance is to a great
extent fueled by markets because corporations, as described in the film "The
Corporation", are the political-economic equivalent of monsters. Corporations
demand increasing profit for their shareholders at the expense of everything
else. In a market economy, it is perversely rational to establish these
corporate monsters since markets are a competitive realm where you win at
another's expense -- to behave like a monster in effect, and the bigger the
monster, the better the chance to win. Therefore, it is imperative to address
markets as well as corporations.  
  
This is a cruel irony since markets have been touted in various ways even by
many liberals and leftists as neutral, beneficient, or unavoidable -- but
seldom as a key institution than should be abolished and replaced. The
proverbial "invisible hand" of competitive markets is long touted. Far less
discussed is what some critical economists have called the "invisible foot",
which refer to the problems that are endemic to markets. These problems
include markets' competitive ethos fostering monstrous corporations, markets'
chronic mispricing focusing prices exclusively on buyers and sellers, and
markets' persistently ignoring social, labor, and environmental
considerations.  
  
**Section Two: What solutions have been proposed?**   
  
Some believe markets can be controlled and harnessed, and their worse aspects
contained and minimized. But, as I've said elsewhere, provisions can be put in
place to mitigate some of the negative effects of markets, just as we see in
present-day efforts to oppose corporations, but corporations by their
competitive urge and competitive advantage fight back, and thanks to this eat-
or-be-eaten logic of markets corporations win nearly every time. Plus, there
remains the potential to ignore or belittle the chronic problems with markets
-- blatant mispricing, commodity fetishism, ignoring social consumption, and
others. Some may try to solve those problems by means outside of the market,
but market advocates fight back with the proverbial stick of "free markets".  
  
Many on the left have proposed a command-planning economy instead, even though
this has been soundly rebuked, including by mainstream economists. Command-
planning economies bear top-down hierarchies, ignore social effects, see
technical information monopolized by a select few, and (ironically enough for
a supposedly non-competitive model) spawn competition among actors within the
command-planning pecking order.  
  
Now we see an intersection of supposedly disparate parts of the economic
spectrum. Corporations themselves are command planning economies and possess
the structural attributes of command-planning economies. This leads to another
cruel irony: those who advocate markets as an alternative wind up spawning the
very command-planning institutions that they've opposed, except that they're
corporations originating in the economic sphere rather than command-planning
states in the political sphere.  
  
So what remains instead of these retentionist systems, such as markets,
command-planning, and corporations? Since the economic problems at hand are
systemic, the solutions themselves must also be systemic. And one set of
alternative economic systems that has been offered is termed "democratic
planning".  
  
**Section Three: What solution would I advocate?**   
  
The best model of democratic planning goes by the name of "parecon" --
participatory economics. Here is a description of what it is, how it works,
and how it's better than what's come before.  
  
Parecon is an economic model that strives to achieve solidarity, equity,
efficiency, diversity, and self-management (a set of values encapsulated in
the acronym "SEEDS"). Parecon has four main institutions: (1) All jobs are
balanced for desirability and empowerment. (2) Remuneration is determined by
effort and sacrifice in socially-valued labor as gauged by one's workmates.
(3) Economic decisions are made by decision-making bodies comprising those who
work in a workplace or consume in a residence, where those who are impacted by
a decision have decision-making power proportional to the degree they're
impacted by that decision. (4) A participatory planning procedure addresses
allocation, where consumption or production plans are submitted, with the help
of a facilitation mechanism, to those who are impacted by those plans, and
revised if necessary by those who made those plans in a series of rounds based
on assorted qualitative and quantitative feedback, all done without command
planning and without markets.  
  
Parecon is better than retentionist systems like command planning, markets,
and corporations because parecon spells out a new and markedly different set
of rules to achieve a positive set of goals. Retentionist systems bear job
hierarchies where a relative few bear highly empowering and desirable jobs,
whereas participatory economics requires jobs balanced for desirability and
empowerment. Retentionist systems pay poorly and require decisions that
(overwhelmingly negatively) affect those who have little say in those
decisions; parecon pays more fairly and strives to provide more fair decision-
making power to its participants. In allocation, parecon uses participatory
planning for the shared goal of eliminating excess demand, in contrast to
competitive markets which spawn command-planning corporations and to the
command-planning economies which spawn competition.  
  
**Section Four: What can we do?**   
  
In sum, we should abolish corporations by abolishing the markets where they
spawn and thrive, and replace those markets with a participatory economy.
Easier said than done. How do we do that?  
  
First, we must widen awareness of the idea and build support for it. There are
many things we can do, like this panel, and expressing the ideas in various
creative media -- radio, video and film, in print, on the internet, and
elsewhere -- and in various forms, fictional and actual alike. We also have to
draw connections between this admittedly abstract and far-reaching proposal
and the immediate impacts it has on so-called "everyday people". We can use
these ideas to help people in their immediate needs and concerns, and connect
previously disparate activist efforts on the immediate anti-corporate
initiatives and those who work on the theoretical economics front.  
  
The next steps and the harder steps include calling out the hypocrisy and
double-standards among retentionists, regardless where they fall on the
political spectrum. It's easy to mock acolytes of Milton Friedman as unwitting
and hypocritical command-planning advocates. It's far more difficult to
critique liberal or left groups that implement organizational structures that
often structurally mimic the very corporations we oppose.  
  
It's also hard, but necessary, to build new institutions that implement
parecon rules. There are already some existing examples, and we should
continue to build more. One idea along these lines would be to make a website
or other entity that has established a useful function directly using the
structures of participatory economics to its advantage.  
  
At some point, with continued agitation and with expanded imagination, we can
ultimately implement the institutional changes we need, but we must seriously
take on the question "What do we want?". Oddly enough, both libertarians and
Marxists, though they can't agree on what color the sky is, curiously offer
the very same response to the question of "What do you want?" They both
answer: "Let's figure that out after we win." Fat chance: We won't win if we
don't seriously address this question, and I hope that this presentation
offers some food for thought in this regard. I thank you for your time and
attention, and I look forward to your questions and comments.

