{:title "A Merger that isn't Comcastic"
:layout :post
:tags  ["media"]}

by Steve Macek and Mitchell Szczepanczyk  
  
On December 3, 2009, the cable giant Comcast announced plans to buy
NBC/Universal from General Electric in a $28 billion merger.  
  
Ever since, lawmakers in Washington and legions of activists have been raising
the alarm about the threat such a deal would pose to telecommunication
workers, cable and Internet users, and communities of color.  
  
As a result, the Federal Communication Commission (FCC), the Justice
Department, and two Congressional committees have spent months carefully
reviewing the proposed merger. The FCC even held a public hearing on the
matter in Chicago last month.  
  
Chief among the concerns the FCC must consider is the impact of the merger on
workers. Comcast CEO Brian Roberts has promised that there will be no massive
layoffs," even though every big media merger inevitably brings with it steep
job cuts. For example, when AOL bought Time-Warner in 2000, the company laid
off some 2,400 employees in the space of a year, about 3 percent of its total
pre-merger workforce.  
  
What's more, Comcast has a long history of attempting to break its employees'
unions and firing labor organizers. When Comcast bought AT&T; Broadband in
2002, Comcast refused to negotiate a first contract with 16 former AT&T;
collective bargaining units and forced employees to attend intimidating anti-
union meetings. Comcast has also spent lavishly to defeat the Employee Free
Choice Act, which aims to strengthen workers' right to form unions.
Unsurprisingly, research shows that Comcast pays its workers 30 percent less
in wages and benefits than other, unionized telecom companies.  
  
The FCC must also scrutinize the potential of a combined Comcast/NBC to
undermine "network neutrality," which requires Internet Service Providers to
treat all legal Internet content equally. Comcast is America's leading
provider of broadband Internet access and has been caught repeatedly blocking
its users' downloads on peer-to-peer file sharing sites. They even sued the
FCC over its right to enforce network neutrality and won in a controversial
federal court case.  
  
A Comcast buyout of NBC/Universal would also lead to Comcast control of the
NBC and Telemundo broadcast networks and 52 cable channels, including MSNBC,
Bravo, USA, E!, Style, Versus, and Comcast SportsNet. Having this mother lode
of content would give Comcast even greater incentive to discriminate in favor
of its own online video offerings and against video available from BitTorrent,
YouTube, or Blip.tv.  
  
A Comcast/NBC merger could also be detrimental to communities of color. This
very concern was the main topic of a hearing, also held in Chicago, by the
U.S. House Subcommittee on Communications, Technology, and the Internet on
July 8, 2010. There, complaints abounded about the lack of diversity in
Comcast and NBC hiring practices, the companies' upper-level management and
their television programming.  
  
As Representative Maxine Waters pointed out at the hearing, only two of 28
Comcast executives and only two of 18 NBC Universal executives are people of
color. Even worse, of the dozens of cable networks currently owned by Comcast
and NBC, only one is headed up by a person of color. The National Association
of Hispanic Journalists opposes the merger -- which will give Comcast control
over the second-largest Spanish language TV network in the county-- because
they fear it will lead to fewer jobs for Latino broadcast journalists and less
coverage of the Latino community.  
  
Comcast and NBC have offered some proposals to address these concerns, but as
Stanley E. Washington, president and CEO of the National Coalition of African
American Owned Media, said previously: "It's crumbs and they know it is
crumbs." And as Representative Maxine Waters said at the Chicago House
Committee hearing: "Neither Comcast nor NBC made any of these (pro-diversity)
moves...until all of this began to unfold."  
  
Then, there's the bread-and-butter issues about Comcast and cable television
in general: higher cable costs, fewer cable channels (especially fewer
independent channels), less funds for public access, education, and government
cable channels, and ever worsening customer service.  
  
Over the past five years, Comcast has jacked up its cable rates by nearly 50
percent in certain markets and plans to raise rates by 4 percent for some
customers again in August. At the same time, the company has long had the
lowest customer satisfaction ratings of any of the country's cable and
satellite TV providers.  
  
For all of these reasons, the FCC and the Justice Department should reject the
proposed merger, which for the public is decidedly not Comcastic.
