{:title "The Story of The Ministry of Truth"
:layout :post
:tags  ["media"]}

_The following essay about my weekly radio program, The Ministry of Truth, originally appeared in WHPK Magazine, Volume 2, #1, published Winter Quarter 2010_  
  
The start of my involvement with WHPK began when I ran into a friend of mine,
Dan Liechtenstein-Boris. Dan himself had a show on WHPK in 2003 and granted me
an interview. The interview was about media politics and the FCC, aptly
fitting given my longtime involvement with political activism on media issues.
So when we met up again by chance at a computer lab in the summer of 2004 in
the basement of the Regenstein Library, the topic of our conversation turned
to that interview on WHPK the year before and that he had a show on WHPK,
after which he said those words that still resonate for me:  
  
"You should have a radio show."  
  
It wasn't quite like the journalist Eddie Ellis who wrote what would become
the world's largest diary as the results of a dare. But I had the feeling that
this single seemingly small sentence could be the start of something pretty
big and expansive. I had some background in working on radio, having
contributed for a year on "From The Trenches", the monthly radio program of
Chicago Indymedia, on Loyola University's WLUW-FM, and I was looking to expand
my personal media and political activism repertoire to include radio. What's
more, there were lots of excellent community public affairs radio shows on the
north side, but it seemed to me there were too few such shows on the south
side, so I thought a show of mine on WHPK could help fill that gap. I just
didn't expect it all to happen so quickly or...unexpectedly.  
  
Dan helped me start a conversation with Jake Austen, then as now WHPK's Public
Affairs format chief. I told Jake my interest in starting a radio show on
WHPK, Jake put me in touch with Mario from News From The Service Entrance, the
radio show, who over the course of three weeks trained me for my own show. But
what to name the show?  
  
The previous summer, I had seen a film called "Orwell Rolls In His Grave", a
documentary about the U.S. media, its political economy, what it discussed (or
doesn't discuss) regarding a host of contemporary issues of importance. The
film drew parallels to George Orwell's famous book "1984", and one quote in
the film referred to the famous Ministry of Truth, one of the governing
ministries in the novel. A friend of mine who also saw the film suggested "The
Ministry of Truth" as the name of my new radio show, and I liked the name so I
used it.  
  
And on Thursday, October 7, 2004, the first episode of "The Ministry of Truth"
(TMOT) aired on WHPK, the bulk of which then as now was recorded in advance.
When TMOT first started, most of the content I produced comprised what I
called "truth tracks" -- ten-minute-long radio documentaries on a given topic
of critical importance and with an exciting musical beat. I was hoping to
create the radio equivalent of the "newsvideos" (short, exciting, charismatic,
and informative documentaries styled as music videos), pioneered by a now-
defunct video production company called the Guerrilla News Network. I was able
to produce "truth tracks" for TMOT for about a year, after which I focused
attention on interviews and presentations as features of TMOT, including
monologues and presentations of my own.  
  
As of this writing, I have produced and aired 196 original episodes of TMOT,
the full list and complete audio of all shows are online at my own website
([www.szcz.org/radio](http://www.szcz.org/radio)). The show has mirrored
my own interest in the politics of the U.S. and international left, focusing
on topics of media, economics, politics, current events, international
affairs, and activist efforts for a better future. But I was also able to make
TMOT and WHPK a radio syndicate outlet for a number of grassroots-produced
national radio shows. WHPK became the second radio affiliate in America to
carry "Media Minutes" -- a weekly, five-minute-long summary of news at the
intersection of media and democracy. A now-defunct news and journalism website
called The NewStandard (TNS) provided headlines for TMOT in the three years of
its operation, and when TNS also carried a weekly radio headline summary of
its own for about a year, TMOT also carried that. After TNS folded, TMOT
started carrying the weekly radio commentaries provided the website
BlackAgendaReport.com, having done so nearly three years now.  
  
In more than five years of TMOT, I have been fortunate to discuss a staggering
variety of topics and news stores, and interview some of the more prominent
local and national activists in America. These include the host of the weekly
radio and TV news program Democracy Now! Amy Goodman, the health-care activist
Quentin Young, the noted scholar and activist on American media policy Robert
McChesney, former Congressional representative and 2008 presidential candidate
Cynthia McKinney, and sports columnist and commentator Dave Zirin.  
  
My vote for the most noteworthy TMOT episodes I ever recorded involved an
interview of two members of the Seattle Common Ground collective, and a
documentary film producer, whom I interviewed over the phone from New Orleans
in 2007 on the second anniversary of Hurricane Katrina. The event that was
taking place was the International Tribunal on Hurricanes Katrina and Rita, a
major effort by hundreds of international lawyers to document the displacement
of about a half-million people from the Gulf Coast as a result of both
hurricanes and bring the U.S. government to account for the abuses that
occurred against displaced (mostly African American and working-class)
communities. Despite the ample coverage in the U.S. corporate media of both
hurricanes and their immediate aftermath, The Tribunal received absolutely no
corporate media coverage, and almost no independent media coverage. The
resulting two-episode interview about the Tribunal nearly brought me to tears,
and I felt privileged to have had the chance to bring the matter to wider
awareness.  
  
I have been a longtime activist on media issues, mostly with the group Chicago
Media Action, and one key component of my own work on media politics has been
to discuss what's going on in media politics. And for good reason: The
American media establishment seldom cover their own politics, understandably
since the national media politics scene is replete with corruption. Once
"everyday people" enter the arena of media politics on an issue, the game is
changed tremendously for the better, and the best way to do that is to inform
"everyday people". A chronicle of my media activism career is reflected in the
coverage of media politics on TMOT, and TMOT has been a critical tool in my
arsenal for improving the corrupt media politics scene. The media issues I've
worked on and covered include the FCC's (repeatedly failed) attempts at
supersizing media concentration (which was the topic Dan Liechtenstein-Boris
interviewed me about on his show back in 2003), community internet
initiatives, the net neutrality wars, the U.S. digital television transition,
the current struggles over funding public access television, and now the
future (or perhaps lack thereof) of commercial broadcast radio and television.  
  
I've also used TMOT to highlight a great many local Chicago activists on a
variety of other non-media-related issues. A sampling of such activists
include attorney and activist Jeff Frank about Chicago's Anti-Protester
Disorderly Conduct Ordinance, Neil Resnikoff about the privatization of
Chicago's public schools, Soo Ji Min of the Illinois Caucus for Adolescent
Health, and Ray Parrish of Vietnam Veterans Against the War. TMOT was one of
the few Chicago broadcast venues to provide in-depth discussion of valid
community critiques of the recent 2016 Chicago Olympics bid, with interviews
of Anne Elizabeth Moore and Matt Joynt of the Unlympic Organizing Committee,
and Jitu Brown of the Kenwood Oakland Community Organization. I interviewed
two of the three candidates in the 2007 Chicago mayoral race for TMOT.  
  
While it is easy to be overwhelmed by the panoply of issues facing us all and
the ability (or inability) to solve some very tough social problems, it is
important to know that it's the same tried-and-true recipe of education,
organizing, involvement, and outreach that has worked in the past is our best
hope for the future. The Ministry of Truth on WHPK is and has been "thirty
minutes of information and inspiration" in a radio environment where "too
often, broadcast radio insults your intelligence, instead of respecting it,
improving it, challenging it". I am grateful to the volunteers and staff of
WHPK radio for the opportunity to help change minds and change the world, and
especially to Dan for his suggestion, Jake for saying "yes" to the show
proposal, and Mario for his assistance in helping to get and keep TMOT on the
air.  
  
Listen to The Ministry of Truth every Thursday afternoon on WHPK 88.5 FM or
online at www.whpk.org and at www.szcz.org 

