{:title "Media Democracy Day 2010: The story of Chicago Independent Television"
:layout :post
:tags  ["media"]}

At Media Democracy Day 2009, I had the good fortune to talk about the future
of media policy, highlighting my work with the group Chicago Media Action.
This year, I'm talking about another media-themed project that I'm a part of,
but one themed to _making_ media -- Chicago Independent Television, the
monthly television series of the Chicago Independent Media Center, Chicago
Indymedia. It's a show that in a news-magazine-like format covers the
intersection of Chicago and social justice. In this presentation, I'll talk
about the show's history and achievements, some of the short films we've
produced over the years, a behind-the-scenes look at the production of an
episode, some more philosophical words about the show, and a bit what the
future might bring.  
  
In Hollywood, TV shows can sometimes spinoff from movies, and in a way that's
how CITV started. The movie in question was "Where We Stood" -- a documentary
produced by four Chicago filmmakers about the of March 20, 2003 antiwar
protests in downtown Chicago and Lake Shore Drive on the escalation of the war
in Iraq. (That film by the way was later aired on CAN TV, WTTW, and even ABC
Channel 7; through those airings, Where We Stood earned a local Emmy
nomination, though it lost to a pro-war documentary by the NBC affiliate in
Milwaukee.) After one of the screenings of Where We Stood, members of Chicago
Indymedia approached the producers of Where We Stood to consider the formation
of a Chicago Indymedia video project, to continue the work stemming from Where
We Stood. In the summer of 2003, a meeting at Chicago Indymedia's offices was
held to agree to launch a project and have as its main focus the production of
a regular TV series.  
  
Most of those subsequent meetings in the late summer and fall of 2003 saw a
lot of questions: Where would it air? How long would a given episode last? How
frequently would we produce new episodes? What do you put in the show? What
would the show's name be? In the end, we finally decided on producing a single
new half-hour episode once a month. That might not sound like a lot to have to
produce, but we styled the show like a televised news magazine, complete with
a host, a regular show open and close, a series of short film segments
surrounded by bumpers and nonprofit PSA "advertisements" -- what we call the
show's "spine". And you already know the show's name.  
  
The show finally launched in January 2004, and the first episode featured
segments on a boycott of Coca-Cola over labor repression in Colombia, the
Latino Union working on behalf of Chicago day laborers, an antiracism march in
St. Joseph MI, and the first National Conference for Media Reform, held in
Madison, WI in 2003. Starting a regular show, a regular anything is
comparatively easy; keeping the show going, that's hard. Indeed, the show
produced four episodes for the first four months of 2004, but only two more
episodes for the rest of the whole year in 2004. But things improved; we were
able to produce eight episodes in 2005. Now, we have a regular schedule where
we produce ten new episodes a year; we take the months of August and December
off. This week saw the debut of our 62nd original episode.  
  
That first episode aired on CAN TV Chicago Cable channel 19, which to our
eternal appreciation has aired the show since its beginning, and still does
today. A year and a half after the show began, one of our former contributors,
Kyle Harris, moved to Boulder, Colorado, and got a job at Free Speech TV, the
progressive satellite TV channel which airs on Dish Network. Kyle emailed us
offering CITV a chance on to be on FSTV, and after some paperwork we got on a
national satellite network, which still airs us and reposts episodes of CITV
on the Free Speech website, [freespeech.org](\"http://www.freespeech.org\").
In October 2007, we started a podcast where we posted digital MP4 files of
complete episodes on the Internet Archive. That podcast is also now linked on
iTunes, as is the complete archive of episodes online at Chicago Indymedia's
website, [chicago.indymedia.org](\"http://chicago.indymedia.org\")  
  
Chicago Independent Television arguably began with covering the grassroots
Chicago response to the war in Iraq and we have continued that coverage over
the years, typically devoting an entire episode to the annual protests,
including coverage of the repeated responses by local officials to block or
intimidate protesters and the counter-responses by protesters in return. Our
bread and butter over the years has been Chicago area protests, on a variety
of topics -- Palestine, civil liberties, public housing struggles,
environmental actions, health care, prison-related struggles, LGBT rights,
anti-military struggles, labor actions, the Olympics, the list goes on. Of
particular note to Media Democracy Day, CITV has covered many media matters
over the years like media concentration, net neutrality, digital television,
and three of the first four National Conferences for Media Reform.  
  
A given half-hour episode of CITV typically contains four segments each around
five minutes long and over the years we've done a handful of episode-long
presentations. Chicago Indymedia's video collective typically meets twice a
month during months when we're scheduled to produce a new episode. At the
first of these meetings, we map out our paper edit for the next episode -- a
detailed list of everything in a given episode down to the second. We also
figure out details like who the host would be; what the deadlines for
submitting segments; when we expect to produce host introductions; who the
host, producer, and editor of a given episode will be; and so on. In the next
two weeks, we carry out that plan as well as we can so that by the second
meeting we hold a review screening to watch a draft of the next full episode.
We watch and critique it, noting any glitches or errors or fixes to make. The
final edits are then made in the next few days, and a new episode is submitted
to CAN TV typically at the end of the third week of a month, and to Free
Speech TV near the end of a month.  
  
There is and probably always will be a tension on CITV between non-
professional enthusiasm and professional standards. There is great strength in
the power of grassroots media production, and indeed Chicago Indymedia's whole
ethos includes expanding the power of the media, certainly among disadvantaged
communities. But at the same time we strive to produce each episode of CITV to
meet broadcast-quality technical standards for our broadcast partners, and it
can be hard for non-professional video to meet those standards. That's not to
say that non-professional involvement in shunned or never incorporated into
the show; on the contrary, when I helped form Chicago Indymedia's video
collective, I had a grand total of zero experience in making or editing video
or film and I have now to date produced 48 short films for the show. All I'm
saying is that we do ourselves no favors to ignore this tension, but we should
acknowledge it and work with that diversity of experience, even if it means
more work. Besides, video-making skills can be learned; I did.  
  
And the show has made an impact in other ways. While CITV is all but ignored
in the American and Chicago commercial corporate media, we're a go-to resource
for overseas and nonprofit media outlets for "dissident footage" -- from
Channel 4 in Britain to Russia Today to NOW on PBS -- mainly because the
American commercial media don't cover what we cover. Our footage of the
Chicago antiwar martyr Malachi Ritscher is being incorporated in two
forthcoming British documentaries about Malachi. The show is watched, thanks
to Free Speech TV, across the country, to the point where I can't walk across
the main hall of the National Conference for Media Reform without getting
recognized from the TV show.  
  
A protest or event is one thing, but a protest or event is there and then gone
-- unless it's recorded on some media. Then it's not just a protest or event
-- it has the potential to live forever. Too often, activists regard
independent media involvement as an afterthought or something remembered at
the last minute, if it's remembered at all. I say that it's not an event or
protest, or not much of one, without a serious independent media component,
and we must always remember this. So, if you've got a protest or event coming
up, let us know so we can record it. Or better yet if you have a videocamera
or a video-capable mobile device, let us know so we can work with you to
incorporate your footage into theshow. If you're interested in being a host,
or can write, or can generate ideas or organize, even if you have no current
video skills, you can contribute to CITV. There's more to making videos than
making videos.  
  
I would hope that we can expand the reach to other audiences. CITV has also
been on YouTube since 2007 (indeed CITV predates YouTube), but I'd like to see
the show get on Link TV on DirecTV, or perhaps on Chicago nonprofit broadcast
television (dare to dream!). But I think that the next few years will focus on
defending the outlets that _currently_ host our show, particularly since
they'll those outlets will face increasing attack. We should do well to
remember that and include that fact in our work, as part of the show and
elsewhere.  
  
A big debt of gratitude goes out to Jon Groot and Fred Hickler -- two longtime
producers and editors of the show who have been with the show since the
beginning, as well to Andrew Neef, a recent contributor to the show, and to
the many folks who have been contributors large and small, since the show
began now seven years ago. I leave you with the words from GRTV, the TV outlet
that helped shape my own personal political awakening, which are apropos for
CITV and for videomaking generally: If you're not making television, it's
making you.  
  
Thank you.

