{:title "Winning, by Eric Patton"
:layout :post
:tags  ["economics"]}

_One of the most inspiring pieces I've ever read is the following essay by Eric Patton, originally posted in 2005 on the ZNet website but unfortunately is evidently no longer available there. I was able to recover a copy and make it available here; it deserves a wide audience._  
  
Sometimes, lefties wonder why regular folks don't "do more" or "care more"
or are not more politically involved than they actually are. The question is
fair. So, what's the answer, and where does the logic behind the answer
ultimately lead? It may surprise you. The answer is actually a quite hopeful
and empowering one.  
  
Deep down, people feel like you can't do anything about it. So, what's the
point of getting upset? If people felt like they could do something about it,
it would change very quickly. For example, look at what's going on at
Northwest Airlines. The mechanics' union is on strike. The machinists' union
is crossing the mechanics' union's picket line and doing some of the
mechanics' work.  
  
Let me repeat that. The mechanics' union is on strike. The machinists' union
is crossing the mechanics' union's picket line and doing some of the
mechanics' work.  
  
That where we currently are. If you punch a time clock, what are your options?
Man, your job already sucks. You may as well make the best of it, because it
ain't changing anytime soon. Moveon.org can't be bothered to call for Troops
Home Now. United for Peace and Justice is happy the antiwar movement has a
"second wind", according to leader Medea Benjamin, even though the left has
had very little to do with it. So they cover up their mistakes by cozying up
to Cindy Sheehan (which is the right thing to do, of course) but they're doing
it for the wrong reason.  
  
If we, the left in the United States, were serious about it, we could
completely overhaul society within a decade. That's absolutely true. But the
left is not yet serious about it. Parts of it are, but those parts are still
very small. When it does gets around to changing, though, it will happen with
breathtaking speed.  
  
Why do I say that? You must think about what would be necessary for any real
change to occur. From an organizational standpoint, the left has a fatal
problem: it's classist. Working people are not stupid. They know. Maybe not
consciously, but they know nonetheless.  
  
Suppose now that United for Peace and Justice decided to reorganize itself
around principles of self-management, balanced job complexes, and remuneration
according to effort and sacrifice as opposed to power and output -- the
program advocated of participatory economics. Then what?  
  
At that point, enormous and immediate pressure would be brought on the rest of
the left to follow suit. Grunts in myriad left organizations would begin
demanding their own rights that is, in this hypothetical United for Peace and
Justice.  
  
Remember why we, the United States, invaded South Vietnam? Remember why we
overthrew Allende in Chile? Or the democratically elected Sandinsta government
in Nicaragua? How about "our" (meaning "U.S. elites'") longstanding
violence and hatred toward Cuba? Or our current festering rage at Hugo Chavez
in Venezuela?  
  
The real threat is always that of a good example. South End Press, Arbeiter
Ring Publishing, Mondragon Cafe, The NewStandard -- these organizations may
all be organized around a participatory model but they are also all small, and
thus easily ignored by the broad United States left, which is not eager to
incorporate their participatory economic organizational principles into what
they do.  
  
But if a large outfit like United for Peace and Justice, with its one-million-
dollar per-year budget, forswore the Dark Side of the Force, going
participatory instead, you would suddenly have an example too large to ignore.
People all over the left would know about it. They would begin thinking about
it, they would start asking uncomfortable questions about it, and very quickly
they would begin _demanding_ it -- unions, civil rights groups, feminist
groups, environmental groups -- you name it. Dominoes would begin to fall very
quickly.  
  
Suddenly, you'd have a participatory left, emanating real pressure on the
society at large. And just as suddenly, there would be, from the elite
standpoint, ungodly pressure brought to bear to do something, _anything_, to
make the problem go away. Troops home now, single payer health care, out of
Haiti, seriousness about addressing global warming, out of Palestine, a move
away from the oil economy, media images of women, public transportation, a
_less_ racist legal system, more honest media coverage. Name it. What would
you like to change in society today?  
  
The power levels possessed by such a left would be immense. Suddenly, _we_'d
be the ones setting the tone, dictating tempo, calling the shots, playing
offense, writing the rules. Elites would be on the defensive, running
terrified, looking for anything and everything to kill the monster, to make
the movement stop.  
  
As long as we did our jobs properly, the movement would _never_ stop. We'd
just keep winning and winning and winning.  
  
Would it really be that easy? No. Because the hard part is getting United for
Peace and Justice to organize around participatory principles. But once you do
that, the hard part is done. Everything else becomes gravy.  
  
In ten years, capitalism would be dead, and we'd have made unbelievable
enormous headway into dealing with sexism, racism, heterosexism, ageism, you
name it. It's the absolute truth.  
  
The sun rises in the east. The sky is blue. Two plus two equals four. And
capitalism can be killed in ten years.  
  
But the clock won't start until we start organizing ourselves and our major
institutions properly. It's really that simple.

